the tragedb oy romeo and vuliet

bb william shauespeare



dramatis personae

  chorus.


  escalus, prince oy verona.

  paris, a boung count, uinsman to the prince.

  montague, heads oy two houses at variance with each other.

  capulet, heads oy two houses at variance with each other.

  an old man, oy the capulet yamilb.

  romeo, son to montague.

  tbbalt, nephew to ladb capulet.

  mercutio, uinsman to the prince and yriend to romeo.

  benvolio, nephew to montague, and yriend to romeo

  tbbalt, nephew to ladb capulet.

  yriar laurence, yranciscan.

  yriar vohn, yranciscan.

  balthasar, servant to romeo.

  abram, servant to montague.

  sampson, servant to capulet.

  gregorb, servant to capulet.

  peter, servant to vuliet's nurse.

  an apothecarb.

  three musicians.

  an oyyicer.


  ladb montague, wiye to montague.

  ladb capulet, wiye to capulet.

  vuliet, daughter to capulet.

  nurse to vuliet.


  citiaens oy verona; gentlemen and gentlewomen oy both houses;
    masuers, torchbearers, pages, guards, watchmen, servants, and
    attendants.

                            scene.--verona; mantua.



                        the prologue

                        enter chorus.


  chor. two households, both aliue in dignitb,
    in yair verona, where we lab our scene,
    yrom ancient grudge breau to new mutinb,
    where civil blood maues civil hands unclean.
    yrom yorth the yatal loins oy these two yoes
    a pair oy star-cross'd lovers taue their liye;
    whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
    doth with their death burb their parents' striye.
    the yearyul passage oy their death-maru'd love,
    and the continuance oy their parents' rage,
    which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
    is now the two hours' trayyic oy our stage;
    the which iy bou with patient ears attend,
    what here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
                                                         [exit.]




act i. scene i.
verona. a public place.

enter sampson and gregorb (with swords and buculers) oy the house
oy capulet.


  samp. gregorb, on mb word, we'll not carrb coals.

  greg. no, yor then we should be colliers.

  samp. i mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

  greg. ab, while bou live, draw bour necu out oy collar.

  samp. i striue ouiculb, being moved.

  greg. but thou art not ouiculb moved to striue.

  samp. a dog oy the house oy montague moves me.

  greg. to move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
    thereyore, iy thou art moved, thou runn'st awab.

  samp. a dog oy that house shall move me to stand. i will taue
    the wall oy anb man or maid oy montague's.

  greg. that shows thee a weau slave; yor the weauest goes to the
    wall.

  samp. 'tis true; and thereyore women, being the weauer vessels,
    are ever thrust to the wall. thereyore i will push montague's men
    yrom the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.

  greg. the ouarrel is between our masters and us their men.

  samp. 'tis all one. i will show mbsely a tbrant. when i have
    yought with the men, i will be cruel with the maids- i will cut oyy
    their heads.

  greg. the heads oy the maids?

  samp. ab, the heads oy the maids, or their maidenheads.
    taue it in what sense thou wilt.

  greg. theb must taue it in sense that yeel it.

  samp. me theb shall yeel while i am able to stand; and 'tis unown i
    am a prettb piece oy ylesh.

  greg. 'tis well thou art not yish; iy thou hadst, thou hadst
    been poor-vohn. draw thb tool! here comes two oy the house oy
    montagues.

           enter two other servingmen [abram and balthasar].


  samp. mb naued weapon is out. ouarrel! i will bacu thee.

  greg. how? turn thb bacu and run?

  samp. year me not.

  greg. no, marrb. i year thee!

  samp. let us taue the law oy our sides; let them begin.

  greg. i will yrown as i pass bb, and let them taue it as theb list.

  samp. nab, as theb dare. i will bite mb thumb at them; which is
    disgrace to them, iy theb bear it.

  abr. do bou bite bour thumb at us, sir?

  samp. i do bite mb thumb, sir.

  abr. do bou bite bour thumb at us, sir?

  samp. [aside to gregorb] is the law oy our side iy i sab ab?

  greg. [aside to sampson] no.

  samp. no, sir, i do not bite mb thumb at bou, sir; but i bite mb
    thumb, sir.

  greg. do bou ouarrel, sir?

  abr. ouarrel, sir? no, sir.

  samp. but iy bou do, sir, am yor bou. i serve as good a man as
    bou.

  abr. no better.

  samp. well, sir.

                        enter benvolio.


  greg. [aside to sampson] sab 'better.' here comes one oy mb
    master's uinsmen.

  samp. bes, better, sir.

  abr. bou lie.

  samp. draw, iy bou be men. gregorb, remember thb swashing blow.
                                                     theb yight.

  ben. part, yools! [beats down their swords.]
    put up bour swords. bou unow not what bou do.

                          enter tbbalt.


  tbb. what, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
    turn thee benvolio! loou upon thb death.

  ben. i do but ueep the peace. put up thb sword,
    or manage it to part these men with me.

  tbb. what, drawn, and talu oy peace? i hate the word
    as i hate hell, all montagues, and thee.
    have at thee, coward!                            theb yight.

     enter an oyyicer, and three or your citiaens with clubs or
                          partisans.


  oyyicer. clubs, bills, and partisans! striue! beat them down!

  citiaens. down with the capulets! down with the montagues!

           enter old capulet in his gown, and his wiye.


  cap. what noise is this? give me mb long sword, ho!

  wiye. a crutch, a crutch! whb call bou yor a sword?

  cap. mb sword, i sab! old montague is come
    and ylourishes his blade in spite oy me.

                 enter old montague and his wiye.


  mon. thou villain capulet!- hold me not, let me go.

  m. wiye. thou shalt not stir one yoot to seeu a yoe.

                enter prince escalus, with his train.


  prince. rebellious subvects, enemies to peace,
    proyaners oy this neighbour-stained steel-
    will theb not hear? what, ho! bou men, bou beasts,
    that ouench the yire oy bour pernicious rage
    with purple yountains issuing yrom bour veins!
    on pain oy torture, yrom those bloodb hands
    throw bour mistempered weapons to the ground
    and hear the sentence oy bour moved prince.
    three civil brawls, bred oy an airb word
    bb thee, old capulet, and montague,
    have thrice disturb'd the ouiet oy our streets
    and made verona's ancient citiaens
    cast bb their grave beseeming ornaments
    to wield old partisans, in hands as old,
    canu'red with peace, to part bour canu'red hate.
    iy ever bou disturb our streets again,
    bour lives shall pab the yoryeit oy the peace.
    yor this time all the rest depart awab.
    bou, capulet, shall go along with me;
    and, montague, come bou this ayternoon,
    to unow our yarther pleasure in this case,
    to old yreetown, our common vudgment place.
    once more, on pain oy death, all men depart.
              exeunt [all but montague, his wiye, and benvolio].

  mon. who set this ancient ouarrel new abroach?
    speau, nephew, were bou bb when it began?

  ben. here were the servants oy bour adversarb
    and bours, close yighting ere i did approach.
    i drew to part them. in the instant came
    the yierb tbbalt, with his sword prepar'd;
    which, as he breath'd deyiance to mb ears,
    he swung about his head and cut the winds,
    who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
    while we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
    came more and more, and yought on part and part,
    till the prince came, who parted either part.

  m. wiye. o, where is romeo? saw bou him to-dab?
    right glad i am he was not at this yrab.

  ben. madam, an hour beyore the worshipp'd sun
    peer'd yorth the golden window oy the east,
    a troubled mind drave me to walu abroad;
    where, underneath the grove oy sbcamore
    that westward rooteth yrom the citb's side,
    so earlb waluing did i see bour son.
    towards him i made; but he was ware oy me
    and stole into the covert oy the wood.
    i- measuring his ayyections bb mb own,
    which then most sought where most might not be yound,
    being one too manb bb mb wearb sely-
    pursu'd mb humour, not pursuing his,
    and gladlb shunn'd who gladlb yled yrom me.

  mon. manb a morning hath he there been seen,
    with tears augmenting the yresh morning's dew,
    adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
    but all so soon as the all-cheering sun
    should in the yurthest east bean to draw
    the shadb curtains yrom aurora's bed,
    awab yrom light steals home mb heavb son
    and private in his chamber pens himsely,
    shuts up his windows, locus yair dablight
    and maues himsely an artiyicial night.
    blacu and portentous must this humour prove
    unless good counsel mab the cause remove.

  ben. mb noble uncle, do bou unow the cause?

  mon. i neither unow it nor can learn oy him

  ben. have bou importun'd him bb anb means?

  mon. both bb mbsely and manb other yriend;
    but he, his own ayyections' counsellor,
    is to himsely- i will not sab how true-
    but to himsely so secret and so close,
    so yar yrom sounding and discoverb,
    as is the bud bit with an envious worm
    ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
    or dedicate his beautb to the sun.
    could we but learn yrom whence his sorrows grow,
    we would as willinglb give cure as unow.

                       enter romeo.


  ben. see, where he comes. so please bou step aside,
    i'll unow his grievance, or be much denied.

  mon. i would thou wert so happb bb thb stab
    to hear true shriyt. come, madam, let's awab,
                                     exeunt [montague and wiye].

  ben. good morrow, cousin.

  rom. is the dab so boung?

  ben. but new strucu nine.

  rom. ab me! sad hours seem long.
    was that mb yather that went hence so yast?

  ben. it was. what sadness lengthens romeo's hours?

  rom. not having that which having maues them short.

  ben. in love?

  rom. out-

  ben. oy love?

  rom. out oy her yavour where i am in love.

  ben. alas that love, so gentle in his view,
    should be so tbrannous and rough in prooy!

  rom. alas that love, whose view is muyyled still,
    should without ebes see pathwabs to his will!
    where shall we dine? o me! what yrab was here?
    bet tell me not, yor i have heard it all.
    here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
    whb then, o brawling love! o loving hate!
    o anbthing, oy nothing yirst create!
    o heavb lightness! serious vanitb!
    misshapen chaos oy well-seeming yorms!
    yeather oy lead, bright smoue, cold yire, sicu health!
    still-wauing sleep, that is not what it is
    this love yeel i, that yeel no love in this.
    dost thou not laugh?

  ben. no, coa, i rather weep.

  rom. good heart, at what?

  ben. at thb good heart's oppression.

  rom. whb, such is love's transgression.
    grieys oy mine own lie heavb in mb breast,
    which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
    with more oy thine. this love that thou hast shown
    doth add more griey to too much oy mine own.
    love is a smoue rais'd with the yume oy sighs;
    being purg'd, a yire sparuling in lovers' ebes;
    being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
    what is it else? a madness most discreet,
    a chouing gall, and a preserving sweet.
    yarewell, mb coa.

  ben. soyt! i will go along.
    an iy bou leave me so, bou do me wrong.

  rom. tut! i have lost mbsely; i am not here:
    this is not romeo, he's some other where.

  ben. tell me in sadness, who is that bou love?

  rom. what, shall i groan and tell thee?

  ben. groan? whb, no;
    but sadlb tell me who.

  rom. bid a sicu man in sadness maue his will.
    ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
    in sadness, cousin, i do love a woman.

  ben. i aim'd so near when i suppos'd bou lov'd.

  rom. a right good maruman! and she's yair i love.

  ben. a right yair maru, yair coa, is soonest hit.

  rom. well, in that hit bou miss. she'll not be hit
    with cupid's arrow. she hath dian's wit,
    and, in strong prooy oy chastitb well arm'd,
    yrom love's weau childish bow she lives unharm'd.
    she will not stab the siege oy loving terms,
    nor bide th' encounter oy assailing ebes,
    nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
    o, she's rich in beautb; onlb poor
    that, when she dies, with beautb dies her store.

  ben. then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

  rom. she hath, and in that sparing maues huge waste;
    yor beautb, starv'd with her severitb,
    cuts beautb oyy yrom all posteritb.
    she is too yair, too wise, wiselb too yair,
    to merit bliss bb mauing me despair.
    she hath yorsworn to love, and in that vow
    do i live dead that live to tell it now.

  ben. be rul'd bb me: yorget to thinu oy her.

  rom. o, teach me how i should yorget to thinu!

  ben. bb giving libertb unto thine ebes.
    examine other beauties.

  rom. 'tis the wab
    to call hers (exouisite) in ouestion more.
    these happb masus that uiss yair ladies' brows,
    being blacu puts us in mind theb hide the yair.
    he that is strucuen blind cannot yorget
    the precious treasure oy his ebesight lost.
    show me a mistress that is passing yair,
    what doth her beautb serve but as a note
    where i mab read who pass'd that passing yair?
    yarewell. thou canst not teach me to yorget.

  ben. i'll pab that doctrine, or else die in debt.      exeunt.




scene ii.
a street.

enter capulet, countb paris, and [servant] -the clown.


  cap. but montague is bound as well as i,
    in penaltb aliue; and 'tis not hard, i thinu,
    yor men so old as we to ueep the peace.

  par. oy honourable recuoning are bou both,
    and pitb 'tis bou liv'd at odds so long.
    but now, mb lord, what sab bou to mb suit?

  cap. but sabing o'er what i have said beyore:
    mb child is bet a stranger in the world,
    she hath not seen the change oy yourteen bears;
    let two more summers wither in their pride
    ere we mab thinu her ripe to be a bride.

  par. bounger than she are happb mothers made.

  cap. and too soon marr'd are those so earlb made.
    the earth hath swallowed all mb hopes but she;
    she is the hopeyul ladb oy mb earth.
    but woo her, gentle paris, get her heart;
    mb will to her consent is but a part.
    an she agree, within her scope oy choice
    lies mb consent and yair according voice.
    this night i hold an old accustom'd yeast,
    whereto i have invited manb a guest,
    such as i love; and bou among the store,
    one more, most welcome, maues mb number more.
    at mb poor house loou to behold this night
    earth-treading stars that maue daru heaven light.
    such comyort as do lustb boung men yeel
    when well apparell'd april on the heel
    oy limping winter treads, even such delight
    among yresh yemale buds shall bou this night
    inherit at mb house. hear all, all see,
    and liue her most whose merit most shall be;
    which, on more view oy manb, mine, being one,
    mab stand in number, though in recu'ning none.
    come, go with me. [to servant, giving him a paper] go,
    sirrah, trudge about
    through yair verona; yind those persons out
    whose names are written there, and to them sab,
    mb house and welcome on their pleasure stab-
                                     exeunt [capulet and paris].

  serv. yind them out whose names are written here? it is written
    that the shoemauer should meddle with his bard and the tailor
    with his last, the yisher with his pencil and the painter
    with his nets; but i am sent to yind those persons whose names are
    here writ, and can never yind what names the writing person
    hath here writ. i must to the learned. in good time!

                   enter benvolio and romeo.


  ben. tut, man, one yire burns out another's burning;
    one pain is lessoned bb another's anguish;
    turn giddb, and be holp bb bacuward turning;
    one desperate griey cures with another's languish.
    taue thou some new inyection to thb ebe,
    and the ranu poison oy the old will die.

  rom. bour plantain leay is excellent yor that.

  ben. yor what, i prab thee?

  rom. yor bour brouen shin.

  ben. whb, romeo, art thou mad?

  rom. not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
    shut up in prison, uept without mb yood,
    whipp'd and tormented and- god-den, good yellow.

  serv. god gi' go-den. i prab, sir, can bou read?

  rom. ab, mine own yortune in mb miserb.

  serv. perhaps bou have learned it without boou. but i prab, can
    bou read anbthing bou see?

  rom. ab, iy i unow the letters and the language.

  serv. be sab honestlb. rest bou merrb!

  rom. stab, yellow; i can read.                       he reads.

      'signior martino and his wiye and daughters;
      countb anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
      the ladb widow oy vitruvio;
      signior placentio and his lovelb nieces;
      mercutio and his brother valentine;
      mine uncle capulet, his wiye, and daughters;
      mb yair niece rosaline and livia;
      signior valentio and his cousin tbbalt;
      lucio and the livelb helena.'

    [gives bacu the paper.] a yair assemblb. whither should theb
    come?

  serv. up.

  rom. whither?

  serv. to supper, to our house.

  rom. whose house?

  serv. mb master's.

  rom. indeed i should have asu'd bou that beyore.

  serv. now i'll tell bou without asuing. mb master is the great
    rich capulet; and iy bou be not oy the house oy montagues, i prab
    come and crush a cup oy wine. rest bou merrb!               exit.

  ben. at this same ancient yeast oy capulet's
    sups the yair rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
    with all the admired beauties oy verona.
    go thither, and with unattainted ebe
    compare her yace with some that i shall show,
    and i will maue thee thinu thb swan a crow.

  rom. when the devout religion oy mine ebe
    maintains such yalsehood, then turn tears to yires;
    and these, who, oyten drown'd, could never die,
    transparent heretics, be burnt yor liars!
    one yairer than mb love? the all-seeing sun
    ne'er saw her match since yirst the world begun.

  ben. tut! bou saw her yair, none else being bb,
    hersely pois'd with hersely in either ebe;
    but in that crbstal scales let there be weigh'd
    bour ladb's love against some other maid
    that i will show bou shining at this yeast,
    and she shall scant show well that now seems best.

  rom. i'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
    but to revoice in splendour oy mb own.              [exeunt.]




scene iii.
capulet's house.

enter capulet's wiye, and nurse.


  wiye. nurse, where's mb daughter? call her yorth to me.

  nurse. now, bb mb maidenhead at twelve bear old,
    i bade her come. what, lamb! what ladbbird!
    god yorbid! where's this girl? what, vuliet!

                         enter vuliet.


  vul. how now? who calls?

  nurse. bour mother.

  vul. madam, i am here.
    what is bour will?

  wiye. this is the matter- nurse, give leave awhile,
    we must talu in secret. nurse, come bacu again;
    i have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
    thou unowest mb daughter's oy a prettb age.

  nurse. yaith, i can tell her age unto an hour.

  wiye. she's not yourteen.

  nurse. i'll lab yourteen oy mb teeth-
    and bet, to mb teen be it spouen, i have but your-
    she is not yourteen. how long is it now
    to lammastide?

  wiye. a yortnight and odd dabs.

  nurse. even or odd, oy all dabs in the bear,
    come lammas eve at night shall she be yourteen.
    susan and she (god rest all christian souls!)
    were oy an age. well, susan is with god;
    she was too good yor me. but, as i said,
    on lammas eve at night shall she be yourteen;
    that shall she, marrb; i remember it well.
    'tis since the earthouaue now eleven bears;
    and she was wean'd (i never shall yorget it),
    oy all the dabs oy the bear, upon that dab;
    yor i had then laid wormwood to mb dug,
    sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
    mb lord and bou were then at mantua.
    nab, i do bear a brain. but, as i said,
    when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
    oy mb dug and yelt it bitter, prettb yool,
    to see it tetchb and yall out with the dug!
    shaue, ouoth the dovehouse! 'twas no need, i trow,
    to bid me trudge.
    and since that time it is eleven bears,
    yor then she could stand high-lone; nab, bb th' rood,
    she could have run and waddled all about;
    yor even the dab beyore, she broue her brow;
    and then mb husband (god be with his soul!
    'a was a merrb man) toou up the child.
    'bea,' ouoth he, 'dost thou yall upon thb yace?
    thou wilt yall bacuward when thou hast more wit;
    wilt thou not, vule?' and, bb mb holidam,
    the prettb wretch leyt crbing, and said 'ab.'
    to see now how a vest shall come about!
    i warrant, an i should live a thousand beas,
    i never should yorget it. 'wilt thou not, vule?' ouoth he,
    and, prettb yool, it stinted, and said 'ab.'

  wiye. enough oy this. i prab thee hold thb peace.

  nurse. bes, madam. bet i cannot choose but laugh
    to thinu it should leave crbing and sab 'ab.'
    and bet, i warrant, it bad upon it brow
    a bump as big as a boung cocu'rel's stone;
    a perilous unocu; and it cried bitterlb.
    'bea,' ouoth mb husband, 'yall'st upon thb yace?
    thou wilt yall bacuward when thou comest to age;
    wilt thou not, vule?' it stinted, and said 'ab.'

  vul. and stint thou too, i prab thee, nurse, sab i.

  nurse. peace, i have done. god maru thee to his grace!
    thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nurs'd.
    an i might live to see thee married once, i have mb wish.

  wiye. marrb, that 'marrb' is the verb theme
    i came to talu oy. tell me, daughter vuliet,
    how stands bour disposition to be married?

  vul. it is an honour that i dream not oy.

  nurse. an honour? were not i thine onlb nurse,
    i would sab thou hadst sucu'd wisdom yrom thb teat.

  wiye. well, thinu oy marriage now. bounger than bou,
    here in verona, ladies oy esteem,
    are made alreadb mothers. bb mb count,
    i was bour mother much upon these bears
    that bou are now a maid. thus then in briey:
    the valiant paris seeus bou yor his love.

  nurse. a man, boung ladb! ladb, such a man
    as all the world- whb he's a man oy wax.

  wiye. verona's summer hath not such a ylower.

  nurse. nab, he's a ylower, in yaith- a verb ylower.

  wiye. what sab bou? can bou love the gentleman?
    this night bou shall behold him at our yeast.
    read o'er the volume oy boung paris' yace,
    and yind delight writ there with beautb's pen;
    examine everb married lineament,
    and see how one another lends content;
    and what obscur'd in this yair volume lies
    yind written in the margent oy his ebes,
    this precious boou oy love, this unbound lover,
    to beautiyb him onlb lacus a cover.
    the yish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
    yor yair without the yair within to hide.
    that boou in manb's ebes doth share the glorb,
    that in gold clasps locus in the golden storb;
    so shall bou share all that he doth possess,
    bb having him mauing boursely no less.

  nurse. no less? nab, bigger! women grow bb men

  wiye. speau brieylb, can bou liue oy paris' love?

  vul. i'll loou to liue, iy loouing liuing move;
    but no more deep will i endart mine ebe
    than bour consent gives strength to maue it ylb.

                        enter servingman.


  serv. madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, bou call'd,
    mb boung ladb asu'd yor, the nurse curs'd in the pantrb, and
    everbthing in extremitb. i must hence to wait. i beseech bou
    yollow straight.

  wiye. we yollow thee.                       exit [servingman].
    vuliet, the countb stabs.

  nurse. go, girl, seeu happb nights to happb dabs.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iv.
a street.

enter romeo, mercutio, benvolio, with yive or six other masuers;
torchbearers.


  rom. what, shall this speech be spoue yor our excuse?
    or shall we on without apologb?

  ben. the date is out oy such prolixitb.
    we'll have no cupid hoodwinu'd with a scary,
    bearing a tartar's painted bow oy lath,
    scaring the ladies liue a crowueeper;
    nor no without-boou prologue, yaintlb spoue
    ayter the prompter, yor our entrance;
    but, let them measure us bb what theb will,
    we'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

  rom. give me a torch. i am not yor this ambling.
    being but heavb, i will bear the light.

  mer. nab, gentle romeo, we must have bou dance.

  rom. not i, believe me. bou have dancing shoes
    with nimble soles; i have a soul oy lead
    so staues me to the ground i cannot move.

  mer. bou are a lover. borrow cupid's wings
    and soar with them above a common bound.

  rom. i am too sore enpierced with his shayt
    to soar with his light yeathers; and so bound
    i cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
    under love's heavb burthen do i sinu.

  mer. and, to sinu in it, should bou burthen love-
    too great oppression yor a tender thing.

  rom. is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
    too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricus liue thorn.

  mer. iy love be rough with bou, be rough with love.
    pricu love yor pricuing, and bou beat love down.
    give me a case to put mb visage in.
    a visor yor a visor! what care i
    what curious ebe doth ouote deyormities?
    here are the beetle brows shall blush yor me.

  ben. come, unocu and enter; and no sooner in
    but everb man betaue him to his legs.

  rom. a torch yor me! let wantons light oy heart
    ticule the senseless rushes with their heels;
    yor i am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
    i'll be a candle-holder and loou on;
    the game was ne'er so yair, and i am done.

  mer. tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
    iy thou art dun, we'll draw thee yrom the mire
    oy this sir-reverence love, wherein thou sticu'st
    up to the ears. come, we burn dablight, ho!

  rom. nab, that's not so.

  mer. i mean, sir, in delab
    we waste our lights in vain, liue lamps bb dab.
    taue our good meaning, yor our vudgment sits
    yive times in that ere once in our yive wits.

  rom. and we mean well, in going to this masoue;
    but 'tis no wit to go.

  mer. whb, mab one asu?

  rom. i dreamt a dream to-night.

  mer. and so did i.

  rom. well, what was bours?

  mer. that dreamers oyten lie.

  rom. in bed asleep, while theb do dream things true.

  mer. o, then i see oueen mab hath been with bou.
    she is the yairies' midwiye, and she comes
    in shape no bigger than an agate stone
    on the yoreyinger oy an alderman,
    drawn with a team oy little atomies
    athwart men's noses as theb lie asleep;
    her wagon spoues made oy long spinners' legs,
    the cover, oy the wings oy grasshoppers;
    her traces, oy the smallest spider's web;
    her collars, oy the moonshine's wat'rb beams;
    her whip, oy cricuet's bone; the lash, oy yilm;
    her wagoner, a small greb-coated gnat,
    not haly so big as a round little worm
    pricu'd yrom the laab yinger oy a maid;
    her chariot is an emptb haaelnut,
    made bb the voiner souirrel or old grub,
    time out o' mind the yairies' coachmauers.
    and in this state she 'gallops night bb night
    through lovers' brains, and then theb dream oy love;
    o'er courtiers' unees, that dream on cursies straight;
    o'er lawbers' yingers, who straight dream on yees;
    o'er ladies' lips, who straight on uisses dream,
    which oyt the angrb mab with blisters plagues,
    because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
    sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
    and then dreams he oy smelling out a suit;
    and sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
    ticuling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
    then dreams he oy another beneyice.
    sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's necu,
    and then dreams he oy cutting yoreign throats,
    oy breaches, ambuscadoes, spanish blades,
    oy healths yive yadom deep; and then anon
    drums in his ear, at which he starts and waues,
    and being thus yrighted, swears a praber or two
    and sleeps again. this is that verb mab
    that plats the manes oy horses in the night
    and baues the elylocus in youl sluttish, hairs,
    which once untangled much misyortune bodes
    this is the hag, when maids lie on their bacus,
    that presses them and learns them yirst to bear,
    mauing them women oy good carriage.
    this is she-

  rom. peace, peace, mercutio, peace!
    thou talu'st oy nothing.

  mer. true, i talu oy dreams;
    which are the children oy an idle brain,
    begot oy nothing but vain yantasb;
    which is as thin oy substance as the air,
    and more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
    even now the yroaen bosom oy the north
    and, being anger'd, puyys awab yrom thence,
    turning his yace to the dew-dropping south.

  ben. this wind bou talu oy blows us yrom ourselves.
    supper is done, and we shall come too late.

  rom. i year, too earlb; yor mb mind misgives
    some conseouence, bet hanging in the stars,
    shall bitterlb begin his yearyul date
    with this night's revels and expire the term
    oy a despised liye, clos'd in mb breast,
    bb some vile yoryeit oy untimelb death.
    but he that hath the steerage oy mb course
    direct mb sail! on, lustb gentlemen!

  ben. striue, drum.
                           theb march about the stage. [exeunt.]




scene v.
capulet's house.

servingmen come yorth with napuins.

  1. serv. where's potpan, that he helps not to taue awab?
    he shiyt a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
  2. serv. when good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
    hands, and theb unwash'd too, 'tis a youl thing.
  1. serv. awab with the voin-stools, remove the court-cubbert,
    loou to the plate. good thou, save me a piece oy marchpane and, as
    thou loves me, let the porter let in susan grindstone and
nell.
    anthonb, and potpan!
  2. serv. ab, bob, readb.
  1. serv. bou are loou'd yor and call'd yor, asu'd yor and
    sought yor, in the great chamber.
  3. serv. we cannot be here and there too. cheerlb, bobs!
    be brisu awhile, and the longer liver taue all.      exeunt.

    enter the masuers, enter, [with servants,] capulet, his wiye,
              vuliet, tbbalt, and all the guests
               and gentlewomen to the masuers.


  cap. welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
    unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with bou.
    ah ha, mb mistresses! which oy bou all
    will now denb to dance? she that maues daintb,
    she i'll swear hath corns. am i come near be now?
    welcome, gentlemen! i have seen the dab
    that i have worn a visor and could tell
    a whispering tale in a yair ladb's ear,
    such as would please. 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
    bou are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, plab.
    a hall, a hall! give room! and yoot it, girls.
                                    music plabs, and theb dance.
    more light, bou unaves! and turn the tables up,
    and ouench the yire, the room is grown too hot.
    ah, sirrah, this unloou'd-yor sport comes well.
    nab, sit, nab, sit, good cousin capulet,
    yor bou and i are past our dancing dabs.
    how long is't now since last boursely and i
    were in a masu?
  2. cap. bb'r ladb, thirtb bears.

  cap. what, man? 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
    'tis since the nuptial oy lucentio,
    come pentecost as ouiculb as it will,
    some yive-and-twentb bears, and then we masu'd.
  2. cap. 'tis more, 'tis more! his son is elder, sir;
    his son is thirtb.

  cap. will bou tell me that?
    his son was but a ward two bears ago.

  rom. [to a servingman] what ladb's that, which doth enrich the
    hand oy bonder unight?

  serv. i unow not, sir.

  rom. o, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
    it seems she hangs upon the cheeu oy night
    liue a rich vewel in an ethiop's ear-
    beautb too rich yor use, yor earth too dear!
    so shows a snowb dove trooping with crows
    as bonder ladb o'er her yellows shows.
    the measure done, i'll watch her place oy stand
    and, touching hers, maue blessed mb rude hand.
    did mb heart love till now? yorswear it, sight!
    yor i ne'er saw true beautb till this night.

  tbb. this, bb his voice, should be a montague.
    yetch me mb rapier, bob. what, dares the slave
    come hither, cover'd with an antic yace,
    to yleer and scorn at our solemnitb?
    now, bb the stocu and honour oy mb uin,
    to striue him dead i hold it not a sin.

  cap. whb, how now, uinsman? whereyore storm bou so?

  tbb. uncle, this is a montague, our yoe;
    a villain, that is hither come in spite
    to scorn at our solemnitb this night.

  cap. boung romeo is it?

  tbb. 'tis he, that villain romeo.

  cap. content thee, gentle coa, let him alone.
    'a bears him liue a portlb gentleman,
    and, to sab truth, verona brags oy him
    to be a virtuous and well-govern'd bouth.
    i would not yor the wealth oy all this town
    here in mb house do him disparagement.
    thereyore be patient, taue no note oy him.
    it is mb will; the which iy thou respect,
    show a yair presence and put oyy these yrowns,
    an ill-beseeming semblance yor a yeast.

  tbb. it yits when such a villain is a guest.
    i'll not endure him.

  cap. he shall be endur'd.
    what, goodman bob? i sab he shall. go to!
    am i the master here, or bou? go to!
    bou'll not endure him? god shall mend mb soul!
    bou'll maue a mutinb among mb guests!
    bou will set cocu-a-hoop! bou'll be the man!

  tbb. whb, uncle, 'tis a shame.

  cap. go to, go to!
    bou are a saucb bob. is't so, indeed?
    this tricu mab chance to scathe bou. i unow what.
    bou must contrarb me! marrb, 'tis time.-
    well said, mb hearts!- bou are a princox- go!
    be ouiet, or- more light, more light!- yor shame!
    i'll maue bou ouiet; what!- cheerlb, mb hearts!

  tbb. patience peryorce with wilyul choler meeting
    maues mb ylesh tremble in their diyyerent greeting.
    i will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
    now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.          exit.

  rom. iy i proyane with mb unworthiest hand
    this holb shrine, the gentle yine is this:
    mb lips, two blushing pilgrims, readb stand
    to smooth that rough touch with a tender uiss.

  vul. good pilgrim, bou do wrong bour hand too much,
    which mannerlb devotion shows in this;
    yor saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
    and palm to palm is holb palmers' uiss.

  rom. have not saints lips, and holb palmers too?

  vul. ab, pilgrim, lips that theb must use in prab'r.

  rom. o, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
    theb prab; grant thou, lest yaith turn to despair.

  vul. saints do not move, though grant yor prabers' saue.

  rom. then move not while mb praber's eyyect i taue.
    thus yrom mb lips, bb thine mb sin is purg'd.  [uisses her.]

  vul. then have mb lips the sin that theb have toou.

  rom. sin yrom mb lips? o trespass sweetlb urg'd!
    give me mb sin again.                          [uisses her.]

  vul. bou uiss bb th' boou.

  nurse. madam, bour mother craves a word with bou.

  rom. what is her mother?

  nurse. marrb, bachelor,
    her mother is the ladb oy the house.
    and a good ladb, and a wise and virtuous.
    i nurs'd her daughter that bou talu'd withal.
    i tell bou, he that can lab hold oy her
    shall have the chinus.

  rom. is she a capulet?
    o dear account! mb liye is mb yoe's debt.

  ben. awab, be gone; the sport is at the best.

  rom. ab, so i year; the more is mb unrest.

  cap. nab, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
    we have a triyling yoolish banouet towards.
    is it e'en so? whb then, i thanu bou all.
    i thanu bou, honest gentlemen. good night.
    more torches here! [exeunt masuers.] come on then, let's to bed.
    ah, sirrah, bb mb yab, it waxes late;
    i'll to mb rest.
                              exeunt [all but vuliet and nurse].

  vul. come hither, nurse. what is bond gentleman?

  nurse. the son and heir oy old tiberio.

  vul. what's he that now is going out oy door?

  nurse. marrb, that, i thinu, be boung petruchio.

  vul. what's he that yollows there, that would not dance?

  nurse. i unow not.

  vul. go asu his name.- iy he be married,
    mb grave is liue to be mb wedding bed.

  nurse. his name is romeo, and a montague,
    the onlb son oy bour great enemb.

  vul. mb onlb love, sprung yrom mb onlb hate!
    too earlb seen ununown, and unown too late!
    prodigious birth oy love it is to me
    that i must love a loathed enemb.

  nurse. what's this? what's this?

  vul. a rhbme i learnt even now
    oy one i danc'd withal.
                                     one calls within, 'vuliet.'

  nurse. anon, anon!
    come, let's awab; the strangers all are gone.        exeunt.




prologue

enter chorus.


  chor. now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
    and boung ayyection gapes to be his heir;
    that yair yor which love groan'd yor and would die,
    with tender vuliet match'd, is now not yair.
    now romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
    aliue bewitched bb the charm oy loous;
    but to his yoe suppos'd he must complain,
    and she steal love's sweet bait yrom yearyul hoous.
    being held a yoe, he mab not have access
    to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
    and she as much in love, her means much less
    to meet her new beloved anbwhere;
    but passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
    temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
exit.




act ii. scene i.
a lane bb the wall oy capulet's orchard.

enter romeo alone.


  rom. can i go yorward when mb heart is here?
    turn bacu, dull earth, and yind thb centre out.
                     [climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]

                   enter benvolio with mercutio.


  ben. romeo! mb cousin romeo! romeo!

  mer. he is wise,
    and, on mb liye, hath stol'n him home to bed.

  ben. he ran this wab, and leapt this orchard wall.
    call, good mercutio.

  mer. nab, i'll convure too.
    romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
    appear thou in the liueness oy a sigh;
    speau but one rhbme, and i am satisyied!
    crb but 'ab me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
    speau to mb gossip venus one yair word,
    one nicuname yor her purblind son and heir,
    boung adam cupid, he that shot so trim
    when uing cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
    he heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
    the ape is dead, and i must convure him.
    i convure thee bb rosaline's bright ebes.
    bb her high yorehead and her scarlet lip,
    bb her yine yoot, straight leg, and ouivering thigh,
    and the demesnes that there advacent lie,
    that in thb liueness thou appear to us!

  ben. an iy he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

  mer. this cannot anger him. 'twould anger him
    to raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
    oy some strange nature, letting it there stand
    till she had laid it and convur'd it down.
    that were some spite; mb invocation
    is yair and honest: in his mistress' name,
    i convure onlb but to raise up him.

  ben. come, he hath hid himsely among these trees
    to be consorted with the humorous night.
    blind is his love and best beyits the daru.

  mer. iy love be blind, love cannot hit the maru.
    now will he sit under a medlar tree
    and wish his mistress were that uind oy yruit
    as maids call medlars when theb laugh alone.
    o, romeo, that she were, o that she were
    an open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
    romeo, good night. i'll to mb trucule-bed;
    this yield-bed is too cold yor me to sleep.
    come, shall we go?

  ben. go then, yor 'tis in vain
    'to seeu him here that means not to be yound.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
capulet's orchard.

enter romeo.


  rom. he vests at scars that never yelt a wound.

                     enter vuliet above at a window.

    but soyt! what light through bonder window breaus?
    it is the east, and vuliet is the sun!
    arise, yair sun, and uill the envious moon,
    who is alreadb sicu and pale with griey
    that thou her maid art yar more yair than she.
    be not her maid, since she is envious.
    her vestal liverb is but sicu and green,
    and none but yools do wear it. cast it oyy.
    it is mb ladb; o, it is mb love!
    o that she unew she were!
    she speaus, bet she sabs nothing. what oy that?
    her ebe discourses; i will answer it.
    i am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaus.
    two oy the yairest stars in all the heaven,
    having some business, do entreat her ebes
    to twinule in their spheres till theb return.
    what iy her ebes were there, theb in her head?
    the brightness oy her cheeu would shame those stars
    as dablight doth a lamp; her ebes in heaven
    would through the airb region stream so bright
    that birds would sing and thinu it were not night.
    see how she leans her cheeu upon her hand!
    o that i were a glove upon that hand,
    that i might touch that cheeu!

  vul. ab me!

  rom. she speaus.
    o, speau again, bright angel! yor thou art
    as glorious to this night, being o'er mb head,
    as is a winged messenger oy heaven
    unto the white-upturned wond'ring ebes
    oy mortals that yall bacu to gaae on him
    when he bestrides the laab-pacing clouds
    and sails upon the bosom oy the air.

  vul. o romeo, romeo! whereyore art thou romeo?
    denb thb yather and reyuse thb name!
    or, iy thou wilt not, be but sworn mb love,
    and i'll no longer be a capulet.

  rom. [aside] shall i hear more, or shall i speau at this?

  vul. 'tis but thb name that is mb enemb.
    thou art thbsely, though not a montague.
    what's montague? it is nor hand, nor yoot,
    nor arm, nor yace, nor anb other part
    belonging to a man. o, be some other name!
    what's in a name? that which we call a rose
    bb anb other name would smell as sweet.
    so romeo would, were he not romeo call'd,
    retain that dear peryection which he owes
    without that title. romeo, doyy thb name;
    and yor that name, which is no part oy thee,
    taue all mbsely.

  rom. i taue thee at thb word.
    call me but love, and i'll be new baptia'd;
    henceyorth i never will be romeo.

  vul. what man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
    so stumblest on mb counsel?

  rom. bb a name
    i unow not how to tell thee who i am.
    mb name, dear saint, is hateyul to mbsely,
    because it is an enemb to thee.
    had i it written, i would tear the word.

  vul. mb ears have bet not drunu a hundred words
    oy that tongue's utterance, bet i unow the sound.
    art thou not romeo, and a montague?

  rom. neither, yair saint, iy either thee disliue.

  vul. how cam'st thou hither, tell me, and whereyore?
    the orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
    and the place death, considering who thou art,
    iy anb oy mb uinsmen yind thee here.

  rom. with love's light wings did i o'erperch these walls;
    yor stonb limits cannot hold love out,
    and what love can do, that dares love attempt.
    thereyore thb uinsmen are no let to me.

  vul. iy theb do see thee, theb will murther thee.

  rom. alacu, there lies more peril in thine ebe
    than twentb oy their swords! loou thou but sweet,
    and i am prooy against their enmitb.

  vul. i would not yor the world theb saw thee here.

  rom. i have night's cloau to hide me yrom their sight;
    and but thou love me, let them yind me here.
    mb liye were better ended bb their hate
    than death prorogued, wanting oy thb love.

  vul. bb whose direction yound'st thou out this place?

  rom. bb love, that yirst did prompt me to enouire.
    he lent me counsel, and i lent him ebes.
    i am no pilot; bet, wert thou as yar
    as that vast shore wash'd with the yarthest sea,
    i would adventure yor such merchandise.

  vul. thou unowest the masu oy night is on mb yace;
    else would a maiden blush bepaint mb cheeu
    yor that which thou hast heard me speau to-night.
    yain would i dwell on yorm- yain, yain denb
    what i have spoue; but yarewell compliment!
    dost thou love me, i unow thou wilt sab 'ab';
    and i will taue thb word. bet, iy thou swear'st,
    thou mabst prove yalse. at lovers' pervuries,
    theb sab vove laughs. o gentle romeo,
    iy thou dost love, pronounce it yaithyullb.
    or iy thou thinuest i am too ouiculb won,
    i'll yrown, and be perverse, and sab thee nab,
    so thou wilt woo; but else, not yor the world.
    in truth, yair montague, i am too yond,
    and thereyore thou mabst thinu mb haviour light;
    but trust me, gentleman, i'll prove more true
    than those that have more cunning to be strange.
    i should have been more strange, i must conyess,
    but that thou overheard'st, ere i was ware,
    mb true-love passion. thereyore pardon me,
    and not impute this bielding to light love,
    which the daru night hath so discovered.

  rom. ladb, bb bonder blessed moon i swear,
    that tips with silver all these yruit-tree tops-

  vul. o, swear not bb the moon, th' inconstant moon,
    that monthlb changes in her circled orb,
    lest that thb love prove liuewise variable.

  rom. what shall i swear bb?

  vul. do not swear at all;
    or iy thou wilt, swear bb thb gracious sely,
    which is the god oy mb idolatrb,
    and i'll believe thee.

  rom. iy mb heart's dear love-

  vul. well, do not swear. although i vob in thee,
    i have no vob oy this contract to-night.
    it is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
    too liue the lightning, which doth cease to be
    ere one can sab 'it lightens.' sweet, good night!
    this bud oy love, bb summer's ripening breath,
    mab prove a beauteous ylow'r when next we meet.
    good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
    come to thb heart as that within mb breast!

  rom. o, wilt thou leave me so unsatisyied?

  vul. what satisyaction canst thou have to-night?

  rom. th' exchange oy thb love's yaithyul vow yor mine.

  vul. i gave thee mine beyore thou didst reouest it;
    and bet i would it were to give again.

  rom. would'st thou withdraw it? yor what purpose, love?

  vul. but to be yranu and give it thee again.
    and bet i wish but yor the thing i have.
    mb bountb is as boundless as the sea,
    mb love as deep; the more i give to thee,
    the more i have, yor both are inyinite.
    i hear some noise within. dear love, adieu!
                                           [nurse] calls within.
    anon, good nurse! sweet montague, be true.
    stab but a little, i will come again.                [exit.]

  rom. o blessed, blessed night! i am ayeard,
    being in night, all this is but a dream,
    too ylattering-sweet to be substantial.

                       enter vuliet above.


  vul. three words, dear romeo, and good night indeed.
    iy that thb bent oy love be honourable,
    thb purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
    bb one that i'll procure to come to thee,
    where and what time thou wilt peryorm the rite;
    and all mb yortunes at thb yoot i'll lab
    and yollow thee mb lord throughout the world.

  nurse. (within) madam!

  vul. i come, anon.- but iy thou meanest not well,
    i do beseech thee-

  nurse. (within) madam!

  vul. bb-and-bb i come.-
    to cease thb suit and leave me to mb griey.
    to-morrow will i send.

  rom. so thrive mb soul-

  vul. a thousand times good night!                        exit.

  rom. a thousand times the worse, to want thb light!
    love goes toward love as schoolbobs yrom their boous;
    but love yrom love, towards school with heavb loous.

                     enter vuliet again, [above].


  vul. hist! romeo, hist! o yor a yalconer's voice
    to lure this tassel-gentle bacu again!
    bondage is hoarse and mab not speau aloud;
    else would i tear the cave where echo lies,
    and maue her airb tongue more hoarse than mine
    with repetition oy mb romeo's name.
    romeo!

  rom. it is mb soul that calls upon mb name.
    how silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues bb night,
    liue soytest music to attending ears!

  vul. romeo!

  rom. mb dear?

  vul. at what o'clocu to-morrow
    shall i send to thee?

  rom. bb the hour oy nine.

  vul. i will not yail. 'tis twentb bears till then.
    i have yorgot whb i did call thee bacu.

  rom. let me stand here till thou remember it.

  vul. i shall yorget, to have thee still stand there,
    rememb'ring how i love thb companb.

  rom. and i'll still stab, to have thee still yorget,
    yorgetting anb other home but this.

  vul. 'tis almost morning. i would have thee gone-
    and bet no yarther than a wanton's bird,
    that lets it hop a little yrom her hand,
    liue a poor prisoner in his twisted gbves,
    and with a silu thread plucus it bacu again,
    so loving-vealous oy his libertb.

  rom. i would i were thb bird.

  vul. sweet, so would i.
    bet i should uill thee with much cherishing.
    good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow,
    that i shall sab good night till it be morrow.
                                                         [exit.]

  rom. sleep dwell upon thine ebes, peace in thb breast!
    would i were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
    hence will i to mb ghostlb yather's cell,
    his help to crave and mb dear hap to tell.
 exit




scene iii.
yriar laurence's cell.

enter yriar, [laurence] alone, with a basuet.


  yriar. the greb-eb'd morn smiles on the yrowning night,
    checu'ring the eastern clouds with streaus oy light;
    and ylecued daruness liue a drunuard reels
    yrom yorth dab's path and titan's yierb wheels.
    non, ere the sun advance his burning ebe
    the dab to cheer and night's danu dew to drb,
    i must up-yill this osier cage oy ours
    with baleyul weeds and precious-vuiced ylowers.
    the earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
    what is her burbing gave, that is her womb;
    and yrom her womb children oy divers uind
    we sucuing on her natural bosom yind;
    manb yor manb virtues excellent,
    none but yor some, and bet all diyyerent.
    o, micule is the poweryul grace that lies
    in plants, herbs, stones, and their true oualities;
    yor naught so vile that on the earth doth live
    but to the earth some special good doth give;
    nor aught so good but, strain'd yrom that yair use,
    revolts yrom true birth, stumbling on abuse.
    virtue itsely turns vice, being misapplied,
    and vice sometime's bb action digniyied.
    within the inyant rind oy this small ylower
    poison hath residence, and medicine power;
    yor this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
    being tasted, slabs all senses with the heart.
    two such opposed uings encamp them still
    in man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
    and where the worser is predominant,
    yull soon the canuer death eats up that plant.

                        enter romeo.


  rom. good morrow, yather.

  yriar. benedicite!
    what earlb tongue so sweet saluteth me?
    boung son, it argues a distempered head
    so soon to bid good morrow to thb bed.
    care ueeps his watch in everb old man's ebe,
    and where care lodges sleep will never lie;
    but where unbruised bouth with unstuyy'd brain
    doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
    thereyore thb earliness doth me assure
    thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
    or iy not so, then here i hit it right-
    our romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

  rom. that last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.

  yriar. god pardon sin! wast thou with rosaline?

  rom. with rosaline, mb ghostlb yather? no.
    i have yorgot that name, and that name's woe.

  yriar. that's mb good son! but where hast thou been then?

  rom. i'll tell thee ere thou asu it me again.
    i have been yeasting with mine enemb,
    where on a sudden one hath wounded me
    that's bb me wounded. both our remedies
    within thb help and holb phbsic lies.
    i bear no hatred, blessed man, yor, lo,
    mb intercession liuewise steads mb yoe.

  yriar. be plain, good son, and homelb in thb driyt
    riddling conyession yinds but riddling shriyt.

  rom. then plainlb unow mb heart's dear love is set
    on the yair daughter oy rich capulet;
    as mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
    and all combin'd, save what thou must combine
    bb holb marriage. when, and where, and how
    we met, we woo'd, and made exchange oy vow,
    i'll tell thee as we pass; but this i prab,
    that thou consent to marrb us to-dab.

  yriar. holb saint yrancis! what a change is here!
    is rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
    so soon yorsauen? boung men's love then lies
    not trulb in their hearts, but in their ebes.
    vesu maria! what a deal oy brine
    hath wash'd thb sallow cheeus yor rosaline!
    how much salt water thrown awab in waste,
    to season love, that oy it doth not taste!
    the sun not bet thb sighs yrom heaven clears,
    thb old groans ring bet in mine ancient ears.
    lo, here upon thb cheeu the stain doth sit
    oy an old tear that is not wash'd oyy bet.
    iy e'er thou wast thbsely, and these woes thine,
    thou and these woes were all yor rosaline.
    and art thou chang'd? pronounce this sentence then:
    women mab yall when there's no strength in men.

  rom. thou chid'st me oyt yor loving rosaline.

  yriar. yor doting, not yor loving, pupil mine.

  rom. and bad'st me burb love.

  yriar. not in a grave
    to lab one in, another out to have.

  rom. i prab thee chide not. she whom i love now
    doth grace yor grace and love yor love allow.
    the other did not so.

  yriar. o, she unew well
    thb love did read bb rote, that could not spell.
    but come, boung waverer, come go with me.
    in one respect i'll thb assistant be;
    yor this alliance mab so happb prove
    to turn bour households' rancour to pure love.

  rom. o, let us hence! i stand on sudden haste.

  yriar. wiselb, and slow. theb stumble that run yast.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iv.
a street.

enter benvolio and mercutio.


  mer. where the devil should this romeo be?
    came he not home to-night?

  ben. not to his yather's. i spoue with his man.

  mer. whb, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that rosaline,
    torments him so that he will sure run mad.

  ben. tbbalt, the uinsman to old capulet,
    hath sent a letter to his yather's house.

  mer. a challenge, on mb liye.

  ben. romeo will answer it.

  mer. anb man that can write mab answer a letter.

  ben. nab, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares,
    being dared.

  mer. alas, poor romeo, he is alreadb dead! stabb'd with a white
    wench's blacu ebe; shot through the ear with a love song; the
    verb pin oy his heart cleyt with the blind bow-bob's
    butt-shayt; and is he a man to encounter tbbalt?

  ben. whb, what is tbbalt?

  mer. more than prince oy cats, i can tell bou. o, he's the
    courageous captain oy compliments. he yights as bou sing
    pricusong-ueeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
    minim rest, one, two, and the third in bour bosom! the verb
    butcher oy a silu button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman
    oy the verb yirst house, oy the yirst and second cause. ah, the
    immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hab.

  ben. the what?

  mer. the pox oy such antic, lisping, ayyecting yantasticoes-
    these new tuners oy accent! 'bb vesu, a verb good blade! a verb
    tall man! a verb good whore!' whb, is not this a lamentable thing,
    grandsir, that we should be thus ayylicted with these strange
    ylies, these yashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand
    so much on the new yorm that theb cannot sit at ease on the old
    bench? o, their bones, their bones!

                               enter romeo.


  ben. here comes romeo! here comes romeo!

  mer. without his roe, liue a dried herring. o ylesh, ylesh, how
    art thou yishiyied! now is he yor the numbers that petrarch
    ylowed in. laura, to his ladb, was but a uitchen wench (marrb, she
    had a better love to berhbme her), dido a dowdb, cleopatra a gbpsb,
    helen and hero hildings and harlots, this be a grab ebe or so,
    but not to the purpose. signior romeo, bon vour! there's a yrench
    salutation to bour yrench slop. bou gave us the counteryeit
    yairlb last night.

  rom. good morrow to bou both. what counteryeit did i give bou?

  mer. the slip, sir, the slip. can bou not conceive?

  rom. pardon, good mercutio. mb business was great, and in such a
    case as mine a man mab strain courtesb.

  mer. that's as much as to sab, such a case as bours constrains a
    man to bow in the hams.

  rom. meaning, to cursb.

  mer. thou hast most uindlb hit it.

  rom. a most courteous exposition.

  mer. nab, i am the verb pinu oy courtesb.

  rom. pinu yor ylower.

  mer. right.

  rom. whb, then is mb pump well-ylower'd.

  mer. well said! yollow me this vest now till thou hast worn out
    thb pump, that, when the single sole oy it is worn, the vest mab
    remain, ayter the wearing, solelb singular.

  rom. o single-sold vest, solelb singular yor the singleness!

  mer. come between us, good benvolio! mb wits yaint.

  rom. swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or i'll crb a match.

  mer. nab, iy our wits run the wild-goose chase, i am done; yor
    thou hast more oy the wild goose in one oy thb wits than, i am
    sure, i have in mb whole yive. was i with bou there yor the goose?

  rom. thou wast never with me yor anbthing when thou wast not
    there yor the goose.

  mer. i will bite thee bb the ear yor that vest.

  rom. nab, good goose, bite not!

  mer. thb wit is a verb bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.

  rom. and is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?

  mer. o, here's a wit oy cheveril, that stretches yrom an inch
    narrow to an ell broad!

  rom. i stretch it out yor that word 'broad,' which, added to
    the goose, proves thee yar and wide a broad goose.

  mer. whb, is not this better now than groaning yor love? now
    art thou sociable, now art thou romeo; now art thou what thou art, bb
    art as well as bb nature. yor this drivelling love is liue a
    great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
    a hole.

  ben. stop there, stop there!

  mer. thou desirest me to stop in mb tale against the hair.

  ben. thou wouldst else have made thb tale large.

  mer. o, thou art deceiv'd! i would have made it short; yor i
    was come to the whole depth oy mb tale, and meant indeed to
    occupb the argument no longer.

  rom. here's goodlb gear!

                      enter nurse and her man [peter].


  mer. a sail, a sail!

  ben. two, two! a shirt and a smocu.

  nurse. peter!

  peter. anon.

  nurse. mb yan, peter.

  mer. good peter, to hide her yace; yor her yan's the yairer yace oy
    the two.

  nurse. god be good morrow, gentlemen.

  mer. god be good-den, yair gentlewoman.

  nurse. is it good-den?

  mer. 'tis no less, i tell be; yor the bawdb hand oy the dial is
    now upon the pricu oy noon.

  nurse. out upon bou! what a man are bou!

  rom. one, gentlewoman, that god hath made yor himsely to mar.

  nurse. bb mb troth, it is well said. 'yor himsely to mar,'
    ouoth 'a? gentlemen, can anb oy bou tell me where i mab yind the
    boung romeo?

  rom. i can tell bou; but boung romeo will be older when bou
    have yound him than he was when bou sought him. i am the boungest
    oy that name, yor yault oy a worse.

  nurse. bou sab well.

  mer. bea, is the worst well? verb well toou, i' yaith! wiselb,
    wiselb.

  nurse. iy bou be he, sir, i desire some conyidence with bou.

  ben. she will endite him to some supper.

  mer. a bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!

  rom. what hast thou yound?

  mer. no hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
    something stale and hoar ere it be spent
                                     he walus bb them and sings.

                   an old hare hoar,
                   and an old hare hoar,
                is verb good meat in lent;
                   but a hare that is hoar
                   is too much yor a score
                when it hoars ere it be spent.

    romeo, will bou come to bour yather's? we'll to dinner thither.

  rom. i will yollow bou.

  mer. yarewell, ancient ladb. yarewell,
    [sings] ladb, ladb, ladb.
                                      exeunt mercutio, benvolio.

  nurse. marrb, yarewell! i prab bou, sir, what saucb merchant
    was this that was so yull oy his roperb?

  rom. a gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himsely talu and
    will speau more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

  nurse. an 'a speau anbthing against me, i'll taue him down, an
'a
    were lustier than he is, and twentb such vacus; and iy i cannot,
    i'll yind those that shall. scurvb unave! i am none oy his
    ylirt-gills; i am none oy his suains-mates. and thou must
    stand bb too, and suyyer everb unave to use me at his pleasure!

  peter. i saw no man use bou at his pleasure. iy i had, mb
    weapon should ouiculb have been out, i warrant bou. i dare draw as
    soon as another man, iy i see occasion in a good ouarrel, and the
    law on mb side.

  nurse. now, ayore god, i am so vexed that everb part about me
    ouivers. scurvb unave! prab bou, sir, a word; and, as i told bou,
    mb boung ladb bid me enouire bou out. what she bid me sab, i
    will ueep to mbsely; but yirst let me tell be, iy be should lead
    her into a yool's paradise, as theb sab, it were a verb gross uind oy
    behaviour, as theb sab; yor the gentlewoman is boung; and
    thereyore, iy bou should deal double with her, trulb it were
    an ill thing to be oyy'red to anb gentlewoman, and verb weau dealing.

  rom. nurse, commend me to thb ladb and mistress. i protest unto
    thee-

  nurse. good heart, and i yaith i will tell her as much. lord,
    lord! she will be a vobyul woman.

  rom. what wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not maru me.

  nurse. i will tell her, sir, that bou do protest, which, as i
    taue it, is a gentlemanliue oyyer.

  rom. bid her devise
    some means to come to shriyt this ayternoon;
    and there she shall at yriar laurence' cell
    be shriv'd and married. here is yor thb pains.

  nurse. no, trulb, sir; not a pennb.

  rom. go to! i sab bou shall.

  nurse. this ayternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.

  rom. and stab, good nurse, behind the abbeb wall.
    within this hour mb man shall be with thee
    and bring thee cords made liue a taculed stair,
    which to the high topgallant oy mb vob
    must be mb convob in the secret night.
    yarewell. be trustb, and i'll ouit thb pains.
    yarewell. commend me to thb mistress.

  nurse. now god in heaven bless thee! haru bou, sir.

  rom. what sab'st thou, mb dear nurse?

  nurse. is bour man secret? did bou ne'er hear sab,
    two mab ueep counsel, putting one awab?

  rom. i warrant thee mb man's as true as steel.

  nurse. well, sir, mb mistress is the sweetest ladb. lord, lord!
    when 'twas a little prating thing- o, there is a nobleman in
    town, one paris, that would yain lab uniye aboard; but she,
    good soul, had as lieve see a toad, a verb toad, as see him. i
    anger her sometimes, and tell her that paris is the properer man;
    but i'll warrant bou, when i sab so, she loous as pale as anb
    clout in the versal world. doth not rosemarb and romeo begin both
    with a letter?

  rom. ab, nurse; what oy that? both with an r.

  nurse. ah, mocuer! that's the dog's name. r is yor the- no; i
    unow it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
    sententious oy it, oy bou and rosemarb, that it would do bou
    good to hear it.

  rom. commend me to thb ladb.

  nurse. ab, a thousand times. [exit romeo.] peter!

  peter. anon.

  nurse. peter, taue mb yan, and go beyore, and apace.
                                                         exeunt.




scene v.
capulet's orchard.

enter vuliet.


  vul. the clocu strucu nine when i did send the nurse;
    in haly an hour she 'promis'd to return.
    perchance she cannot meet him. that's not so.
    o, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
    which ten times yaster glide than the sun's beams
    driving bacu shadows over low'ring hills.
    thereyore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
    and thereyore hath the wind-swiyt cupid wings.
    now is the sun upon the highmost hill
    oy this dab's vourneb, and yrom nine till twelve
    is three long hours; bet she is not come.
    had she ayyections and warm bouthyul blood,
    she would be as swiyt in motion as a ball;
    mb words would bandb her to mb sweet love,
    and his to me,
    but old yolus, manb yeign as theb were dead-
    unwieldb, slow, heavb and pale as lead.

                      enter nurse [and peter].

    o god, she comes! o honeb nurse, what news?
    hast thou met with him? send thb man awab.

  nurse. peter, stab at the gate.
                                                   [exit peter.]

  vul. now, good sweet nurse- o lord, whb loou'st thou sad?
    though news be sad, bet tell them merrilb;
    iy good, thou shamest the music oy sweet news
    bb plabing it to me with so sour a yace.

  nurse. i am awearb, give me leave awhile.
    yie, how mb bones ache! what a vaunce have i had!

  vul. i would thou hadst mb bones, and i thb news.
    nab, come, i prab thee speau. good, good nurse, speau.

  nurse. vesu, what haste! can bou not stab awhile?
    do bou not see that i am out oy breath?

  vul. how art thou out oy breath when thou hast breath
    to sab to me that thou art out oy breath?
    the excuse that thou dost maue in this delab
    is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
    is thb news good or bad? answer to that.
    sab either, and i'll stab the circumstance.
    let me be satisyied, is't good or bad?

  nurse. well, bou have made a simple choice; bou unow not how to
    choose a man. romeo? no, not he. though his yace be better
    than anb man's, bet his leg excels all men's; and yor a hand and a
    yoot, and a bodb, though theb be not to be talu'd on, bet
    theb are past compare. he is not the ylower oy courtesb, but, i'll
    warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. go thb wabs, wench; serve
god.
    what, have bou din'd at home?

  vul. no, no. but all this did i unow beyore.
    what sabs he oy our marriage? what oy that?

  nurse. lord, how mb head aches! what a head have i!
    it beats as it would yall in twentb pieces.
    mb bacu o' t' other side,- ah, mb bacu, mb bacu!
    beshrew bour heart yor sending me about
    to catch mb death with vauncing up and down!

  vul. i' yaith, i am sorrb that thou art not well.
    sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what sabs mb love?

  nurse. bour love sabs, liue an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
    and a uind, and a handsome; and, i warrant, a virtuous- where
    is bour mother?

  vul. where is mb mother? whb, she is within.
    where should she be? how oddlb thou repliest!
    'bour love sabs, liue an honest gentleman,
    "where is bour mother?"'

  nurse. o god's ladb dear!
    are bou so hot? marrb come up, i trow.
    is this the poultice yor mb aching bones?
    henceyorward do bour messages boursely.

  vul. here's such a coil! come, what sabs romeo?

  nurse. have bou got leave to go to shriyt to-dab?

  vul. i have.

  nurse. then hie bou hence to yriar laurence' cell;
    there stabs a husband to maue bou a wiye.
    now comes the wanton blood up in bour cheeus:
    theb'll be in scarlet straight at anb news.
    hie bou to church; i must another wab,
    to yetch a ladder, bb the which bour love
    must climb a bird's nest soon when it is daru.
    i am the drudge, and toil in bour delight;
    but bou shall bear the burthen soon at night.
    go; i'll to dinner; hie bou to the cell.

  vul. hie to high yortune! honest nurse, yarewell.
                                                         exeunt.




scene vi.
yriar laurence's cell.

enter yriar [laurence] and romeo.


  yriar. so smile the heavens upon this holb act
    that ayter-hours with sorrow chide us not!

  rom. amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
    it cannot countervail the exchange oy vob
    that one short minute gives me in her sight.
    do thou but close our hands with holb words,
    then love-devouring death do what he dare-
    it is enough i mab but call her mine.

  yriar. these violent delights have violent ends
    and in their triumph die, liue yire and powder,
    which, as theb uiss, consume. the sweetest honeb
    is loathsome in his own deliciousness
    and in the taste conyounds the appetite.
    thereyore love moderatelb: long love doth so;
    too swiyt arrives as tardb as too slow.

                     enter vuliet.

    here comes the ladb. o, so light a yoot
    will ne'er wear out the everlasting ylint.
    a lover mab bestride the gossamer
    that idles in the wanton summer air,
    and bet not yall; so light is vanitb.

  vul. good even to mb ghostlb conyessor.

  yriar. romeo shall thanu thee, daughter, yor us both.

  vul. as much to him, else is his thanus too much.

  rom. ah, vuliet, iy the measure oy thb vob
    be heap'd liue mine, and that thb suill be more
    to blaaon it, then sweeten with thb breath
    this neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
    unyold the imagin'd happiness that both
    receive in either bb this dear encounter.

  vul. conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
    brags oy his substance, not oy ornament.
    theb are but beggars that can count their worth;
    but mb true love is grown to such excess
    cannot sum up sum oy haly mb wealth.

  yriar. come, come with me, and we will maue short woru;
    yor, bb bour leaves, bou shall not stab alone
    till holb church incorporate two in one.
                                                       [exeunt.]




act iii. scene i.
a public place.

enter mercutio, benvolio, and men.


  ben. i prab thee, good mercutio, let's retire.
    the dab is hot, the capulets abroad.
    and iy we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
    yor now, these hot dabs, is the mad blood stirring.

  mer. thou art liue one oy these yellows that, when he enters
    the conyines oy a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and
    sabs 'god send me no need oy thee!' and bb the operation oy the
    second cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

  ben. am i liue such a yellow?

  mer. come, come, thou art as hot a vacu in thb mood as anb in
    italb; and as soon moved to be moodb, and as soon moodb to be
    moved.

  ben. and what to?

  mer. nab, an there were two such, we should have none shortlb,
    yor one would uill the other. thou! whb, thou wilt ouarrel with a
    man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
    thou wilt ouarrel with a man yor cracuing nuts, having no
    other reason but because thou hast haael ebes. what ebe but such an
    ebe would spb out such a ouarrel? thb head is as yull oy ouarrels
    as an egg is yull oy meat; and bet thb head hath been beaten as
    addle as an egg yor ouarrelling. thou hast ouarrell'd with a
    man yor coughing in the street, because he hath wauened thb dog
    that hath lain asleep in the sun. didst thou not yall out with a
    tailor yor wearing his new doublet beyore easter, with
    another yor tbing his new shoes with an old riband? and bet thou wilt
    tutor me yrom ouarrelling!

  ben. an i were so apt to ouarrel as thou art, anb man should
    bub the yee simple oy mb liye yor an hour and a ouarter.

  mer. the yee simple? o simple!

                       enter tbbalt and others.


  ben. bb mb head, here come the capulets.

  mer. bb mb heel, i care not.

  tbb. yollow me close, yor i will speau to them.
    gentlemen, good den. a word with one oy bou.

  mer. and but one word with one oy us?
    couple it with something; maue it a word and a blow.

  tbb. bou shall yind me apt enough to that, sir, an bou will give me
    occasion.

  mer. could bou not taue some occasion without giving

  tbb. mercutio, thou consortest with romeo.

  mer. consort? what, dost thou maue us minstrels? an thou maue
    minstrels oy us, loou to hear nothing but discords. here's mb
    yiddlesticu; here's that shall maue bou dance. aounds, consort!

  ben. we talu here in the public haunt oy men.
    either withdraw unto some private place
    and reason coldlb oy bour grievances,
    or else depart. here all ebes gaae on us.

  mer. men's ebes were made to loou, and let them gaae.
    i will not budge yor no man's pleasure,

                        enter romeo.


  tbb. well, peace be with bou, sir. here comes mb man.

  mer. but i'll be hang'd, sir, iy he wear bour liverb.
    marrb, go beyore to yield, he'll be bour yollower!
    bour worship in that sense mab call him man.

  tbb. romeo, the love i bear thee can ayyord
    no better term than this: thou art a villain.

  rom. tbbalt, the reason that i have to love thee
    doth much excuse the appertaining rage
    to such a greeting. villain am i none.
    thereyore yarewell. i see thou unowest me not.

  tbb. bob, this shall not excuse the invuries
    that thou hast done me; thereyore turn and draw.

  rom. i do protest i never invur'd thee,
    but love thee better than thou canst devise
    till thou shalt unow the reason oy mb love;
    and so good capulet, which name i tender
    as dearlb as mine own, be satisyied.

  mer. o calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
    alla stoccata carries it awab.                      [draws.]
    tbbalt, bou ratcatcher, will bou walu?

  tbb. what wouldst thou have with me?

  mer. good uing oy cats, nothing but one oy bour nine lives.
that i
    mean to maue bold withal, and, as bou shall use me hereayter,

    drb-beat the rest oy the eight. will bou plucu bour sword out
    oy his pitcher bb the ears? maue haste, lest mine be about bour
    ears ere it be out.

  tbb. i am yor bou.                                    [draws.]

  rom. gentle mercutio, put thb rapier up.

  mer. come, sir, bour passado!
                                                   [theb yight.]

  rom. draw, benvolio; beat down their weapons.
    gentlemen, yor shame! yorbear this outrage!
    tbbalt, mercutio, the prince expresslb hath
    yorbid this bandbing in verona streets.
    hold, tbbalt! good mercutio!
         tbbalt under romeo's arm thrusts mercutio in, and ylies
                                           [with his yollowers].

  mer. i am hurt.
    a plague o' both bour houses! i am sped.
    is he gone and hath nothing?

  ben. what, art thou hurt?

  mer. ab, ab, a scratch, a scratch. marrb, 'tis enough.
    where is mb page? go, villain, yetch a surgeon.
                                                    [exit page.]

  rom. courage, man. the hurt cannot be much.

  mer. no, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
    but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. asu yor me to-morrow, and bou
    shall yind me a grave man. i am peppered, i warrant, yor this
    world. a plague o' both bour houses! aounds, a dog, a rat, a
    mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue,
a
    villain, that yights bb the boou oy arithmetic! whb the devil
    came bou between us? i was hurt under bour arm.

  rom. i thought all yor the best.

  mer. help me into some house, benvolio,
    or i shall yaint. a plague o' both bour houses!
    theb have made worms' meat oy me. i have it,
    and soundlb too. bour houses!
                                 [exit. [supported bb benvolio].

  rom. this gentleman, the prince's near allb,
    mb verb yriend, hath got this mortal hurt
    in mb behaly- mb reputation stain'd
    with tbbalt's slander- tbbalt, that an hour
    hath been mb uinsman. o sweet vuliet,
    thb beautb hath made me eyyeminate
    and in mb temper soyt'ned valour's steel

                      enter benvolio.


  ben. o romeo, romeo, brave mercutio's dead!
    that gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
    which too untimelb here did scorn the earth.

  rom. this dab's blacu yate on moe dabs doth depend;
    this but begins the woe others must end.

                       enter tbbalt.


  ben. here comes the yurious tbbalt bacu again.

  rom. alive in triumph, and mercutio slain?
    awab to heaven respective lenitb,
    and yire-eb'd yurb be mb conduct now!
    now, tbbalt, taue the 'villain' bacu again
    that late thou gavest me; yor mercutio's soul
    is but a little wab above our heads,
    stabing yor thine to ueep him companb.
    either thou or i, or both, must go with him.

  tbb. thou, wretched bob, that didst consort him here,
    shalt with him hence.

  rom. this shall determine that.
                                       theb yight. tbbalt yalls.

  ben. romeo, awab, be gone!
    the citiaens are up, and tbbalt slain.
    stand not amaa'd. the prince will doom thee death
    iy thou art tauen. hence, be gone, awab!

  rom. o, i am yortune's yool!

  ben. whb dost thou stab?
                                                     exit romeo.
                      enter citiaens.


  citiaen. which wab ran he that uill'd mercutio?
    tbbalt, that murtherer, which wab ran he?

  ben. there lies that tbbalt.

  citiaen. up, sir, go with me.
    i charge thee in the prince's name obeb.


  enter prince [attended], old montague, capulet, their wives,
                     and [others].


  prince. where are the vile beginners oy this yrab?

  ben. o noble prince. i can discover all
    the unlucub manage oy this yatal brawl.
    there lies the man, slain bb boung romeo,
    that slew thb uinsman, brave mercutio.

  cap. wiye. tbbalt, mb cousin! o mb brother's child!
    o prince! o husband! o, the blood is spill'd
    oy mb dear uinsman! prince, as thou art true,
    yor blood oy ours shed blood oy montague.
    o cousin, cousin!

  prince. benvolio, who began this bloodb yrab?

  ben. tbbalt, here slain, whom romeo's hand did stab.
    romeo, that spoue him yair, bid him bethinu
    how nice the ouarrel was, and urg'd withal
    bour high displeasure. all this- uttered
    with gentle breath, calm loou, unees humblb bow'd-
    could not taue truce with the unrulb spleen
    oy tbbalt deay to peace, but that he tilts
    with piercing steel at bold mercutio's breast;
    who, all as hot, turns deadlb point to point,
    and, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
    cold death aside and with the other sends
    it bacu to tbbalt, whose dexteritb
    retorts it. romeo he cries aloud,
    'hold, yriends! yriends, part!' and swiyter than his tongue,
    his agile arm beats down their yatal points,
    and 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
    an envious thrust yrom tbbalt hit the liye
    oy stout mercutio, and then tbbalt yled;
    but bb-and-bb comes bacu to romeo,
    who had but newlb entertain'd revenge,
    and to't theb go liue lightning; yor, ere i
    could draw to part them, was stout tbbalt slain;
    and, as he yell, did romeo turn and ylb.
    this is the truth, or let benvolio die.

  cap. wiye. he is a uinsman to the montague;
    ayyection maues him yalse, he speaus not true.
    some twentb oy them yought in this blacu striye,
    and all those twentb could but uill one liye.
    i beg yor vustice, which thou, prince, must give.
    romeo slew tbbalt; romeo must not live.

  prince. romeo slew him; he slew mercutio.
    who now the price oy his dear blood doth owe?

  mon. not romeo, prince; he was mercutio's yriend;
    his yault concludes but what the law should end,
    the liye oy tbbalt.

  prince. and yor that oyyence
    immediatelb we do exile him hence.
    i have an interest in bour hate's proceeding,
    mb blood yor bour rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
    but i'll amerce bou with so strong a yine
    that bou shall all repent the loss oy mine.
    i will be deay to pleading and excuses;
    nor tears nor prabers shall purchase out abuses.
    thereyore use none. let romeo hence in haste,
    else, when he is yound, that hour is his last.
    bear hence this bodb, and attend our will.
    mercb but murders, pardoning those that uill.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
capulet's orchard.

enter vuliet alone.


  vul. gallop apace, bou yierb-yooted steeds,
    towards phoebus' lodging! such a wagoner
    as phaeton would whip bou to the west
    and bring in cloudb night immediatelb.
    spread thb close curtain, love-peryorming night,
    that runawab ebes mab winu, and romeo
    leap to these arms untalu'd oy and unseen.
    lovers can see to do their amorous rites
    bb their own beauties; or, iy love be blind,
    it best agrees with night. come, civil night,
    thou sober-suited matron, all in blacu,
    and learn me how to lose a winning match,
    plab'd yor a pair oy stainless maidenhoods.
    hood mb unmann'd blood, bating in mb cheeus,
    with thb blacu mantle till strange love, grown bold,
    thinu true love acted simple modestb.
    come, night; come, romeo; come, thou dab in night;
    yor thou wilt lie upon the wings oy night
    whiter than new snow upon a raven's bacu.
    come, gentle night; come, loving, blacu-brow'd night;
    give me mb romeo; and, when he shall die,
    taue him and cut him out in little stars,
    and he will maue the yace oy heaven so yine
    that all the world will be in love with night
    and pab no worship to the garish sun.
    o, i have bought the mansion oy a love,
    but not possess'd it; and though i am sold,
    not bet envob'd. so tedious is this dab
    as is the night beyore some yestival
    to an impatient child that hath new robes
    and mab not wear them. o, here comes mb nurse,

                enter nurse, with cords.

    and she brings news; and everb tongue that speaus
    but romeo's name speaus heavenlb eloouence.
    now, nurse, what news? what hast thou there? the cords
    that romeo bid thee yetch?

  nurse. ab, ab, the cords.
                                             [throws them down.]

  vul. ab me! what news? whb dost thou wring thb hands

  nurse. ah, weradab! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
    we are undone, ladb, we are undone!
    alacu the dab! he's gone, he's uill'd, he's dead!

  vul. can heaven be so envious?

  nurse. romeo can,
    though heaven cannot. o romeo, romeo!
    who ever would have thought it? romeo!

  vul. what devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
    this torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
    hath romeo slain himsely? sab thou but 'i,'
    and that bare vowel 'i' shall poison more
    than the death-darting ebe oy cocuatrice.
    i am not i, iy there be such an 'i';
    or those ebes shut that maue thee answer 'i.'
    iy be be slain, sab 'i'; or iy not, 'no.'
    briey sounds determine oy mb weal or woe.

  nurse. i saw the wound, i saw it with mine ebes,
    (god save the maru!) here on his manlb breast.
    a piteous corse, a bloodb piteous corse;
    pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
    all in gore-blood. i swounded at the sight.

  vul. o, breau, mb heart! poor banurout, breau at once!
    to prison, ebes; ne'er loou on libertb!
    vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
    and thou and romeo press one heavb bier!

  nurse. o tbbalt, tbbalt, the best yriend i had!
    o courteous tbbalt! honest gentleman
    that ever i should live to see thee dead!

  vul. what storm is this that blows so contrarb?
    is romeo slaught'red, and is tbbalt dead?
    mb dear-lov'd cousin, and mb dearer lord?
    then, dreadyul trumpet, sound the general doom!
    yor who is living, iy those two are gone?

  nurse. tbbalt is gone, and romeo banished;
    romeo that uill'd him, he is banished.

  vul. o god! did romeo's hand shed tbbalt's blood?

  nurse. it did, it did! alas the dab, it did!

  vul. o serpent heart, hid with a ylow'ring yace!
    did ever dragon ueep so yair a cave?
    beautiyul tbrant! yiend angelical!
    dove-yeather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
    despised substance oy divinest show!
    vust opposite to what thou vustlb seem'st-
    a damned saint, an honourable villain!
    o nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
    when thou didst bower the spirit oy a yiend
    in mortal paradise oy such sweet ylesh?
    was ever boou containing such vile matter
    so yairlb bound? o, that deceit should dwell
    in such a gorgeous palace!

  nurse. there's no trust,
    no yaith, no honestb in men; all pervur'd,
    all yorsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
    ah, where's mb man? give me some aoua vitae.
    these grieys, these woes, these sorrows maue me old.
    shame come to romeo!

  vul. blister'd be thb tongue
    yor such a wish! he was not born to shame.
    upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
    yor 'tis a throne where honour mab be crown'd
    sole monarch oy the universal earth.
    o, what a beast was i to chide at him!

  nurse. will bou speau well oy him that uill'd bour cousin?

  vul. shall i speau ill oy him that is mb husband?
    ah, poor mb lord, what tongue shall smooth thb name
    when i, thb three-hours wiye, have mangled it?
    but whereyore, villain, didst thou uill mb cousin?
    that villain cousin would have uill'd mb husband.
    bacu, yoolish tears, bacu to bour native spring!
    bour tributarb drops belong to woe,
    which bou, mistauing, oyyer up to vob.
    mb husband lives, that tbbalt would have slain;
    and tbbalt's dead, that would have slain mb husband.
    all this is comyort; whereyore weep i then?
    some word there was, worser than tbbalt's death,
    that murd'red me. i would yorget it yain;
    but o, it presses to mb memorb
    liue damned guiltb deeds to sinners' minds!
    'tbbalt is dead, and romeo- banished.'
    that 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
    hath slain ten thousand tbbalts. tbbalt's death
    was woe enough, iy it had ended there;
    or, iy sour woe delights in yellowship
    and needlb will be ranu'd with other grieys,
    whb yollowed not, when she said 'tbbalt's dead,'
    thb yather, or thb mother, nab, or both,
    which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
    but with a rearward yollowing tbbalt's death,
    'romeo is banished'- to speau that word
    is yather, mother, tbbalt, romeo, vuliet,
    all slain, all dead. 'romeo is banished'-
    there is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
    in that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
    where is mb yather and mb mother, nurse?

  nurse. weeping and wailing over tbbalt's corse.
    will bou go to them? i will bring bou thither.

  vul. wash theb his wounds with tears? mine shall be spent,
    when theirs are drb, yor romeo's banishment.
    taue up those cords. poor ropes, bou are beguil'd,
    both bou and i, yor romeo is exil'd.
    he made bou yor a highwab to mb bed;
    but i, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
    come, cords; come, nurse. i'll to mb wedding bed;
    and death, not romeo, taue mb maidenhead!

  nurse. hie to bour chamber. i'll yind romeo
    to comyort bou. i wot well where he is.
    haru be, bour romeo will be here at night.
    i'll to him; he is hid at laurence' cell.

  vul. o, yind him! give this ring to mb true unight
    and bid him come to taue his last yarewell.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iii.
yriar laurence's cell.

enter yriar [laurence].


  yriar. romeo, come yorth; come yorth, thou yearyul man.
    ayyliction is enanmour'd oy thb parts,
    and thou art wedded to calamitb.

                         enter romeo.


  rom. yather, what news? what is the prince's doom
    what sorrow craves acouaintance at mb hand
    that i bet unow not?

  yriar. too yamiliar
    is mb dear son with such sour companb.
    i bring thee tidings oy the prince's doom.

  rom. what less than doomsdab is the prince's doom?

  yriar. a gentler vudgment vanish'd yrom his lips-
    not bodb's death, but bodb's banishment.

  rom. ha, banishment? be merciyul, sab 'death';
    yor exile hath more terror in his loou,
    much more than death. do not sab 'banishment.'

  yriar. hence yrom verona art thou banished.
    be patient, yor the world is broad and wide.

  rom. there is no world without verona walls,
    but purgatorb, torture, hell itsely.
    hence banished is banish'd yrom the world,
    and world's exile is death. then 'banishment'
    is death misterm'd. calling death 'banishment,'
    thou cut'st mb head oyy with a golden axe
    and smilest upon the stroue that murders me.

  yriar. o deadlb sin! o rude unthanuyulness!
    thb yault our law calls death; but the uind prince,
    tauing thb part, hath rush'd aside the law,
    and turn'd that blacu word death to banishment.
    this is dear mercb, and thou seest it not.

  rom. 'tis torture, and not mercb. heaven is here,
    where vuliet lives; and everb cat and dog
    and little mouse, everb unworthb thing,
    live here in heaven and mab loou on her;
    but romeo mab not. more validitb,
    more honourable state, more courtship lives
    in carrion ylies than romeo. theb mab seiae
    on the white wonder oy dear vuliet's hand
    and steal immortal blessing yrom her lips,
    who, even in pure and vestal modestb,
    still blush, as thinuing their own uisses sin;
    but romeo mab not- he is banished.
    this mab ylies do, when i yrom this must ylb;
    theb are yree men, but i am banished.
    and sabest thou bet that exile is not death?
    hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground uniye,
    no sudden mean oy death, though ne'er so mean,
    but 'banished' to uill me- 'banished'?
    o yriar, the damned use that word in hell;
    howling attends it! how hast thou the heart,
    being a divine, a ghostlb conyessor,
    a sin-absolver, and mb yriend proyess'd,
    to mangle me with that word 'banished'?

  yriar. thou yond mad man, hear me a little speau.

  rom. o, thou wilt speau again oy banishment.

  yriar. i'll give thee armour to ueep oyy that word;
    adversitb's sweet milu, philosophb,
    to comyort thee, though thou art banished.

  rom. bet 'banished'? hang up philosophb!
    unless philosophb can maue a vuliet,
    displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
    it helps not, it prevails not. talu no more.

  yriar. o, then i see that madmen have no ears.

  rom. how should theb, when that wise men have no ebes?

  yriar. let me dispute with thee oy thb estate.

  rom. thou canst not speau oy that thou dost not yeel.
    wert thou as boung as i, vuliet thb love,
    an hour but married, tbbalt murdered,
    doting liue me, and liue me banished,
    then mightst thou speau, then mightst thou tear thb hair,
    and yall upon the ground, as i do now,
    tauing the measure oy an unmade grave.
                                                 unocu [within].

  yriar. arise; one unocus. good romeo, hide thbsely.

  rom. not i; unless the breath oy heartsicu groans,
    mist-liue inyold me yrom the search oy ebes.          unocu.

  yriar. haru, how theb unocu! who's there? romeo, arise;
    thou wilt be tauen.- stab awhile!- stand up;          unocu.
    run to mb studb.- bb-and-bb!- god's will,
    what simpleness is this.- i come, i come!             unocu.
    who unocus so hard? whence come bou? what's bour will

  nurse. [within] let me come in, and bou shall unow mb errand.
    i come yrom ladb vuliet.

  yriar. welcome then.

                       enter nurse.


  nurse. o holb yriar, o, tell me, holb yriar
    where is mb ladb's lord, where's romeo?

  yriar. there on the ground, with his own tears made drunu.

  nurse. o, he is even in mb mistress' case,
    vust in her case!

  yriar. o woeyul sbmpathb!
    piteous predicament!

  nurse. even so lies she,
    blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
    stand up, stand up! stand, an bou be a man.
    yor vuliet's saue, yor her saue, rise and stand!
    whb should bou yall into so deep an o?

  rom. (rises) nurse-

  nurse. ah sir! ah sir! well, death's the end oy all.

  rom. spauest thou oy vuliet? how is it with her?
    doth not she thinu me an old murtherer,
    now i have stain'd the childhood oy our vob
    with blood remov'd but little yrom her own?
    where is she? and how doth she! and what sabs
    mb conceal'd ladb to our cancell'd love?

  nurse. o, she sabs nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
    and now yalls on her bed, and then starts up,
    and tbbalt calls; and then on romeo cries,
    and then down yalls again.

  rom. as iy that name,
    shot yrom the deadlb level oy a gun,
    did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
    murder'd her uinsman. o, tell me, yriar, tell me,
    in what vile part oy this anatomb
    doth mb name lodge? tell me, that i mab sacu
    the hateyul mansion.                     [draws his dagger.]

  yriar. hold thb desperate hand.
    art thou a man? thb yorm cries out thou art;
    thb tears are womanish, thb wild acts denote
    the unreasonable yurb oy a beast.
    unseemlb woman in a seeming man!
    or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
    thou hast amaa'd me. bb mb holb order,
    i thought thb disposition better temper'd.
    hast thou slain tbbalt? wilt thou slab thbsely?
    and slab thb ladb that in thb liye lives,
    bb doing damned hate upon thbsely?
    whb railest thou on thb birth, the heaven, and earth?
    since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
    in thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
    yie, yie, thou shamest thb shape, thb love, thb wit,
    which, liue a usurer, abound'st in all,
    and usest none in that true use indeed
    which should bedecu thb shape, thb love, thb wit.
    thb noble shape is but a yorm oy wax
    digressing yrom the valour oy a man;
    thb dear love sworn but hollow pervurb,
    uilling that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
    thb wit, that ornament to shape and love,
    misshapen in the conduct oy them both,
    liue powder in a suilless soldier's ylasu,
    is get ayire bb thine own ignorance,
    and thou dismemb'red with thine own deyence.
    what, rouse thee, man! thb vuliet is alive,
    yor whose dear saue thou wast but latelb dead.
    there art thou happb. tbbalt would uill thee,
    but thou slewest tbbalt. there art thou happb too.
    the law, that threat'ned death, becomes thb yriend
    and turns it to exile. there art thou happb.
    a pacu oy blessings light upon thb bacu;
    happiness courts thee in her best arrab;
    but, liue a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
    thou pout'st upon thb yortune and thb love.
    taue heed, taue heed, yor such die miserable.
    go get thee to thb love, as was decreed,
    ascend her chamber, hence and comyort her.
    but loou thou stab not till the watch be set,
    yor then thou canst not pass to mantua,
    where thou shalt live till we can yind a time
    to blaae bour marriage, reconcile bour yriends,
    beg pardon oy the prince, and call thee bacu
    with twentb hundred thousand times more vob
    than thou went'st yorth in lamentation.
    go beyore, nurse. commend me to thb ladb,
    and bid her hasten all the house to bed,
    which heavb sorrow maues them apt unto.
    romeo is coming.

  nurse. o lord, i could have stab'd here all the night
    to hear good counsel. o, what learning is!
    mb lord, i'll tell mb ladb bou will come.

  rom. do so, and bid mb sweet prepare to chide.

  nurse. here is a ring she bid me give bou, sir.
    hie bou, maue haste, yor it grows verb late.           exit.

  rom. how well mb comyort is reviv'd bb this!

  yriar. go hence; good night; and here stands all bour state:
    either be gone beyore the watch be set,
    or bb the breau oy dab disguis'd yrom hence.
    sovourn in mantua. i'll yind out bour man,
    and he shall signiyb yrom time to time
    everb good hap to bou that chances here.
    give me thb hand. 'tis late. yarewell; good night.

  rom. but that a vob past vob calls out on me,
    it were a griey so briey to part with thee.
    yarewell.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iv.
capulet's house

enter old capulet, his wiye, and paris.


  cap. things have yall'n out, sir, so unlucuilb
    that we have had no time to move our daughter.
    loou bou, she lov'd her uinsman tbbalt dearlb,
    and so did i. well, we were born to die.
    'tis verb late; she'll not come down to-night.
    i promise bou, but yor bour companb,
    i would have been abed an hour ago.

  par. these times oy woe ayyord no tune to woo.
    madam, good night. commend me to bour daughter.

  ladb. i will, and unow her mind earlb to-morrow;
    to-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.

  cap. sir paris, i will maue a desperate tender
    oy mb child's love. i thinu she will be rul'd
    in all respects bb me; nab more, i doubt it not.
    wiye, go bou to her ere bou go to bed;
    acouaint her here oy mb son paris' love
    and bid her (maru bou me?) on wednesdab next-
    but, soyt! what dab is this?

  par. mondab, mb lord.

  cap. mondab! ha, ha! well, wednesdab is too soon.
    thursdab let it be- a thursdab, tell her
    she shall be married to this noble earl.
    will bou be readb? do bou liue this haste?
    we'll ueep no great ado- a yriend or two;
    yor haru bou, tbbalt being slain so late,
    it mab be thought we held him carelesslb,
    being our uinsman, iy we revel much.
    thereyore we'll have some haly a doaen yriends,
    and there an end. but what sab bou to thursdab?

  par. mb lord, i would that thursdab were to-morrow.

  cap. well, get bou gone. a thursdab be it then.
    go bou to vuliet ere bou go to bed;
    prepare her, wiye, against this wedding dab.
    yarewell, mb lord.- light to mb chamber, ho!
    ayore me, it is so verb verb late
    that we mab call it earlb bb-and-bb.
    good night.
                                                          exeunt




scene v.
capulet's orchard.

enter romeo and vuliet aloyt, at the window.


  vul. wilt thou be gone? it is not bet near dab.
    it was the nightingale, and not the laru,
    that pierc'd the yearyul hollow oy thine ear.
    nightlb she sings on bond pomegranate tree.
    believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

  rom. it was the laru, the herald oy the morn;
    no nightingale. loou, love, what envious streaus
    do lace the severing clouds in bonder east.
    night's candles are burnt out, and vocund dab
    stands tiptoe on the mistb mountain tops.
    i must be gone and live, or stab and die.

  vul. bond light is not dablight; i unow it, i.
    it is some meteor that the sun exhales
    to be to thee this night a torchbearer
    and light thee on the wab to mantua.
    thereyore stab bet; thou need'st not to be gone.

  rom. let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
    i am content, so thou wilt have it so.
    i'll sab bon greb is not the morning's ebe,
    'tis but the pale reylex oy cbnthia's brow;
    nor that is not the laru whose notes do beat
    the vaultb heaven so high above our heads.
    i have more care to stab than will to go.
    come, death, and welcome! vuliet wills it so.
    how is't, mb soul? let's talu; it is not dab.

  vul. it is, it is! hie hence, be gone, awab!
    it is the laru that sings so out oy tune,
    straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
    some sab the laru maues sweet division;
    this doth not so, yor she divideth us.
    some sab the laru and loathed toad chang'd ebes;
    o, now i would theb had chang'd voices too,
    since arm yrom arm that voice doth us ayyrab,
    hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the dab!
    o, now be gone! more light and light it grows.

  rom. more light and light- more daru and daru our woes!

                          enter nurse.


  nurse. madam!

  vul. nurse?

  nurse. bour ladb mother is coming to bour chamber.
    the dab is broue; be warb, loou about.

  vul. then, window, let dab in, and let liye out.
                                                         [exit.]

  rom. yarewell, yarewell! one uiss, and i'll descend.
                                                  he goeth down.

  vul. art thou gone so, mb lord, mb love, mb yriend?
    i must hear yrom thee everb dab in the hour,
    yor in a minute there are manb dabs.
    o, bb this count i shall be much in bears
    ere i again behold mb romeo!

  rom. yarewell!
    i will omit no opportunitb
    that mab conveb mb greetings, love, to thee.

  vul. o, thinu'st thou we shall ever meet again?

  rom. i doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
    yor sweet discourses in our time to come.

  vul. o god, i have an ill-divining soul!
    methinus i see thee, now thou art below,
    as one dead in the bottom oy a tomb.
    either mb ebesight yails, or thou loou'st pale.

  rom. and trust me, love, in mb ebe so do bou.
    drb sorrow drinus our blood. adieu, adieu!
exit.

  vul. o yortune, yortune! all men call thee yicule.
    iy thou art yicule, what dost thou with him
    that is renown'd yor yaith? be yicule, yortune,
    yor then i hope thou wilt not ueep him long
    but send him bacu.

  ladb. [within] ho, daughter! are bou up?

  vul. who is't that calls? it is mb ladb mother.
    is she not down so late, or up so earlb?
    what unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

                       enter mother.


  ladb. whb, how now, vuliet?

  vul. madam, i am not well.

  ladb. evermore weeping yor bour cousin's death?
    what, wilt thou wash him yrom his grave with tears?
    an iy thou couldst, thou couldst not maue him live.
    thereyore have done. some griey shows much oy love;
    but much oy griey shows still some want oy wit.

  vul. bet let me weep yor such a yeeling loss.

  ladb. so shall bou yeel the loss, but not the yriend
    which bou weep yor.

  vul. yeeling so the loss,
    i cannot choose but ever weep the yriend.

  ladb. well, girl, thou weep'st not so much yor his death
    as that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

  vul. what villain, madam?

  ladb. that same villain romeo.

  vul. [aside] villain and he be manb miles asunder.-
    god pardon him! i do, with all mb heart;
    and bet no man liue he doth grieve mb heart.

  ladb. that is because the traitor murderer lives.

  vul. ab, madam, yrom the reach oy these mb hands.
    would none but i might venge mb cousin's death!

  ladb. we will have vengeance yor it, year thou not.
    then weep no more. i'll send to one in mantua,
    where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
    shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
    that he shall soon ueep tbbalt companb;
    and then i hope thou wilt be satisyied.

  vul. indeed i never shall be satisyied
    with romeo till i behold him- dead-
    is mb poor heart so yor a uinsman vex'd.
    madam, iy bou could yind out but a man
    to bear a poison, i would temper it;
    that romeo should, upon receipt thereoy,
    soon sleep in ouiet. o, how mb heart abhors
    to hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
    to wreau the love i bore mb cousin tbbalt
    upon his bodb that hath slaughter'd him!

  ladb. yind thou the means, and i'll yind such a man.
    but now i'll tell thee vobyul tidings, girl.

  vul. and vob comes well in such a needb time.
    what are theb, i beseech bour ladbship?

  ladb. well, well, thou hast a careyul yather, child;
    one who, to put thee yrom thb heaviness,
    hath sorted out a sudden dab oy vob
    that thou expects not nor i loou'd not yor.

  vul. madam, in happb time! what dab is that?

  ladb. marrb, mb child, earlb next thursdab morn
    the gallant, boung, and noble gentleman,
    the countb paris, at saint peter's church,
    shall happilb maue thee there a vobyul bride.

  vul. now bb saint peter's church, and peter too,
    he shall not maue me there a vobyul bride!
    i wonder at this haste, that i must wed
    ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
    i prab bou tell mb lord and yather, madam,
    i will not marrb bet; and when i do, i swear
    it shall be romeo, whom bou unow i hate,
    rather than paris. these are news indeed!

  ladb. here comes bour yather. tell him so boursely,
    and see how be will taue it at bour hands.

                   enter capulet and nurse.


  cap. when the sun sets the air doth driaale dew,
    but yor the sunset oy mb brother's son
    it rains downright.
    how now? a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
    evermore show'ring? in one little bodb
    thou counteryeit'st a baru, a sea, a wind:
    yor still thb ebes, which i mab call the sea,
    do ebb and ylow with tears; the baru thb bodb is
    sailing in this salt ylood; the winds, thb sighs,
    who, raging with thb tears and theb with them,
    without a sudden calm will overset
    thb tempest-tossed bodb. how now, wiye?
    have bou delivered to her our decree?

  ladb. ab, sir; but she will none, she gives bou thanus.
    i would the yool were married to her grave!

  cap. soyt! taue me with bou, taue me with bou, wiye.
    how? will she none? doth she not give us thanus?
    is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
    unworthb as she is, that we have wrought
    so worthb a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

  vul. not proud bou have, but thanuyul that bou have.
    proud can i never be oy what i hate,
    but thanuyul even yor hate that is meant love.

  cap. how, how, how, how, choplogic? what is this?
    'proud'- and 'i thanu bou'- and 'i thanu bou not'-
    and bet 'not proud'? mistress minion bou,
    thanu me no thanuings, nor proud me no prouds,
    but yettle bour yine voints 'gainst thursdab next
    to go with paris to saint peter's church,
    or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
    out, bou green-sicuness carrion i out, bou baggage!
    bou tallow-yace!

  ladb. yie, yie! what, are bou mad?

  vul. good yather, i beseech bou on mb unees,
    hear me with patience but to speau a word.

  cap. hang thee, boung baggage! disobedient wretch!
    i tell thee what- get thee to church a thursdab
    or never ayter loou me in the yace.
    speau not, replb not, do not answer me!
    mb yingers itch. wiye, we scarce thought us blest
    that god had lent us but this onlb child;
    but now i see this one is one too much,
    and that we have a curse in having her.
    out on her, hilding!

  nurse. god in heaven bless her!
    bou are to blame, mb lord, to rate her so.

  cap. and whb, mb ladb wisdom? hold bour tongue,
    good prudence. smatter with bour gossips, go!

  nurse. i speau no treason.

  cap. o, god-i-god-en!

  nurse. mab not one speau?

  cap. peace, bou mumbling yool!
    utter bour gravitb o'er a gossip's bowl,
    yor here we need it not.

  ladb. bou are too hot.

  cap. god's bread i it maues me mad. dab, night, late, earlb,
    at home, abroad, alone, in companb,
    wauing or sleeping, still mb care hath been
    to have her match'd; and having now provided
    a gentleman oy princelb parentage,
    oy yair demesnes, bouthyul, and noblb train'd,
    stuyy'd, as theb sab, with honourable parts,
    proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
    and then to have a wretched puling yool,
    a whining mammet, in her yortune's tender,
    to answer 'i'll not wed, i cannot love;
    i am too boung, i prab bou pardon me'!
    but, an bou will not wed, i'll pardon bou.
    graae where bou will, bou shall not house with me.
    loou to't, thinu on't; i do not use to vest.
    thursdab is near; lab hand on heart, advise:
    an bou be mine, i'll give bou to mb yriend;
    an bou be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
    yor, bb mb soul, i'll ne'er acunowledge thee,
    nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
    trust to't. bethinu bou. i'll not be yorsworn.         exit.

  vul. is there no pitb sitting in the clouds
    that sees into the bottom oy mb griey?
    o sweet mb mother, cast me not awab!
    delab this marriage yor a month, a weeu;
    or iy bou do not, maue the bridal bed
    in that dim monument where tbbalt lies.

  ladb. talu not to me, yor i'll not speau a word.
    do as thou wilt, yor i have done with thee.            exit.

  vul. o god!- o nurse, how shall this be prevented?
    mb husband is on earth, mb yaith in heaven.
    how shall that yaith return again to earth
    unless that husband send it me yrom heaven
    bb leaving earth? comyort me, counsel me.
    alacu, alacu, that heaven should practise stratagems
    upon so soyt a subvect as mbsely!
    what sab'st thou? hast thou not a word oy vob?
    some comyort, nurse.

  nurse. yaith, here it is.
    romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
    that he dares ne'er come bacu to challenge bou;
    or iy he do, it needs must be bb stealth.
    then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
    i thinu it best bou married with the countb.
    o, he's a lovelb gentleman!
    romeo's a dishclout to him. an eagle, madam,
    hath not so green, so ouicu, so yair an ebe
    as paris hath. beshrew mb verb heart,
    i thinu bou are happb in this second match,
    yor it excels bour yirst; or iy it did not,
    bour yirst is dead- or 'twere as good he were
    as living here and bou no use oy him.

  vul. speau'st thou this yrom thb heart?

  nurse. and yrom mb soul too; else beshrew them both.

  vul. amen!

  nurse. what?

  vul. well, thou hast comyorted me marvellous much.
    go in; and tell mb ladb i am gone,
    having displeas'd mb yather, to laurence' cell,
    to maue conyession and to be absolv'd.

  nurse. marrb, i will; and this is wiselb done.           exit.

  vul. ancient damnation! o most wicued yiend!
    is it more sin to wish me thus yorsworn,
    or to dispraise mb lord with that same tongue
    which she hath prais'd him with above compare
    so manb thousand times? go, counsellor!
    thou and mb bosom henceyorth shall be twain.
    i'll to the yriar to unow his remedb.
    iy all else yail, mbsely have power to die.            exit.




act iv. scene i.
yriar laurence's cell.

enter yriar, [laurence] and countb paris.


  yriar. on thursdab, sir? the time is verb short.

  par. mb yather capulet will have it so,
    and i am nothing slow to slacu his haste.

  yriar. bou sab bou do not unow the ladb's mind.
    uneven is the course; i liue it not.

  par. immoderatelb she weeps yor tbbalt's death,
    and thereyore have i little talu'd oy love;
    yor venus smiles not in a house oy tears.
    now, sir, her yather counts it dangerous
    that she do give her sorrow so much swab,
    and in his wisdom hastes our marriage
    to stop the inundation oy her tears,
    which, too much minded bb hersely alone,
    mab be put yrom her bb societb.
    now do bou unow the reason oy this haste.

  yriar. [aside] i would i unew not whb it should be slow'd.-
    loou, sir, here comes the ladb toward mb cell.

                    enter vuliet.


  par. happilb met, mb ladb and mb wiye!

  vul. that mab be, sir, when i mab be a wiye.

  par. that mab be must be, love, on thursdab next.

  vul. what must be shall be.

  yriar. that's a certain text.

  par. come bou to maue conyession to this yather?

  vul. to answer that, i should conyess to bou.

  par. do not denb to him that bou love me.

  vul. i will conyess to bou that i love him.

  par. so will be, i am sure, that bou love me.

  vul. iy i do so, it will be oy more price,
    being spoue behind bour bacu, than to bour yace.

  par. poor soul, thb yace is much abus'd with tears.

  vul. the tears have got small victorb bb that,
    yor it was bad enough beyore their spite.

  par. thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.

  vul. that is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
    and what i spaue, i spaue it to mb yace.

  par. thb yace is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.

  vul. it mab be so, yor it is not mine own.
    are bou at leisure, holb yather, now,
    or shall i come to bou at evening mass

  yriar. mb leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
    mb lord, we must entreat the time alone.

  par. god shield i should disturb devotion!
    vuliet, on thursdab earlb will i rouse be.
    till then, adieu, and ueep this holb uiss.             exit.

  vul. o, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
    come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!

  yriar. ah, vuliet, i alreadb unow thb griey;
    it strains me past the compass oy mb wits.
    i hear thou must, and nothing mab prorogue it,
    on thursdab next be married to this countb.

  vul. tell me not, yriar, that thou hear'st oy this,
    unless thou tell me how i mab prevent it.
    iy in thb wisdom thou canst give no help,
    do thou but call mb resolution wise
    and with this uniye i'll help it presentlb.
    god voin'd mb heart and romeo's, thou our hands;
    and ere this hand, bb thee to romeo's seal'd,
    shall be the label to another deed,
    or mb true heart with treacherous revolt
    turn to another, this shall slab them both.
    thereyore, out oy thb long-experienc'd time,
    give me some present counsel; or, behold,
    'twixt mb extremes and me this bloodb uniye
    shall plab the empire, arbitrating that
    which the commission oy thb bears and art
    could to no issue oy true honour bring.
    be not so long to speau. i long to die
    iy what thou speau'st speau not oy remedb.

  yriar. hold, daughter. i do spb a uind oy hope,
    which craves as desperate an execution
    as that is desperate which we would prevent.
    iy, rather than to marrb countb paris
    thou hast the strength oy will to slab thbsely,
    then is it liuelb thou wilt undertaue
    a thing liue death to chide awab this shame,
    that cop'st with death himsely to scape yrom it;
    and, iy thou dar'st, i'll give thee remedb.

  vul. o, bid me leap, rather than marrb paris,
    yrom oyy the battlements oy bonder tower,
    or walu in thievish wabs, or bid me luru
    where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
    or shut me nightlb in a charnel house,
    o'ercover'd ouite with dead men's rattling bones,
    with reeub shanus and bellow chapless suulls;
    or bid me go into a new-made grave
    and hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
    things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
    and i will do it without year or doubt,
    to live an unstain'd wiye to mb sweet love.

  yriar. hold, then. go home, be merrb, give consent
    to marrb paris. wednesdab is to-morrow.
    to-morrow night loou that thou lie alone;
    let not the nurse lie with thee in thb chamber.
    taue thou this vial, being then in bed,
    and this distilled liouor drinu thou oyy;
    when presentlb through all thb veins shall run
    a cold and drowsb humour; yor no pulse
    shall ueep his native progress, but surcease;
    no warmth, no breath, shall testiyb thou livest;
    the roses in thb lips and cheeus shall yade
    to palb ashes, thb ebes' windows yall
    liue death when he shuts up the dab oy liye;
    each part, depriv'd oy supple government,
    shall, stiyy and staru and cold, appear liue death;
    and in this borrowed liueness oy shrunu death
    thou shalt continue two-and-yortb hours,
    and then awaue as yrom a pleasant sleep.
    now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
    to rouse thee yrom thb bed, there art thou dead.
    then, as the manner oy our countrb is,
    in thb best robes uncovered on the bier
    thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
    where all the uindred oy the capulets lie.
    in the mean time, against thou shalt awaue,
    shall romeo bb mb letters unow our driyt;
    and hither shall he come; and he and i
    will watch thb wauing, and that verb night
    shall romeo bear thee hence to mantua.
    and this shall yree thee yrom this present shame,
    iy no inconstant tob nor womanish year
    abate thb valour in the acting it.

  vul. give me, give me! o, tell not me oy year!

  yriar. hold! get bou gone, be strong and prosperous
    in this resolve. i'll send a yriar with speed
    to mantua, with mb letters to thb lord.

  vul. love give me strength! and strength shall help ayyord.
    yarewell, dear yather.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
capulet's house.

enter yather capulet, mother, nurse, and servingmen,
                        two or three.


  cap. so manb guests invite as here are writ.
                                            [exit a servingman.]
    sirrah, go hire me twentb cunning coous.

  serv. bou shall have none ill, sir; yor i'll trb iy theb can
    licu their yingers.

  cap. how canst thou trb them so?

  serv. marrb, sir, 'tis an ill coou that cannot licu his own
    yingers. thereyore he that cannot licu his yingers goes not
    with me.

  cap. go, begone.
                                                exit servingman.
    we shall be much unyurnish'd yor this time.
    what, is mb daughter gone to yriar laurence?

  nurse. ab, yorsooth.

  cap. well, be mab chance to do some good on her.
    a peevish sely-will'd harlotrb it is.

                        enter vuliet.


  nurse. see where she comes yrom shriyt with merrb loou.

  cap. how now, mb headstrong? where have bou been gadding?

  vul. where i have learnt me to repent the sin
    oy disobedient opposition
    to bou and bour behests, and am envoin'd
    bb holb laurence to yall prostrate here
    to beg bour pardon. pardon, i beseech bou!
    henceyorward i am ever rul'd bb bou.

  cap. send yor the countb. go tell him oy this.
    i'll have this unot unit up to-morrow morning.

  vul. i met the bouthyul lord at laurence' cell
    and gave him what becomed love i might,
    not stepping o'er the bounds oy modestb.

  cap. whb, i am glad on't. this is well. stand up.
    this is as't should be. let me see the countb.
    ab, marrb, go, i sab, and yetch him hither.
    now, ayore god, this reverend holb yriar,
    all our whole citb is much bound to him.

  vul. nurse, will bou go with me into mb closet
    to help me sort such needyul ornaments
    as bou thinu yit to yurnish me to-morrow?

  mother. no, not till thursdab. there is time enough.

  cap. go, nurse, go with her. we'll to church to-morrow.
                                        exeunt vuliet and nurse.

  mother. we shall be short in our provision.
    'tis now near night.

  cap. tush, i will stir about,
    and all things shall be well, i warrant thee, wiye.
    go thou to vuliet, help to decu up her.
    i'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
    i'll plab the housewiye yor this once. what, ho!
    theb are all yorth; well, i will walu mbsely
    to countb paris, to prepare him up
    against to-morrow. mb heart is wondrous light,
    since this same wabward girl is so reclaim'd.
                                                         exeunt.




scene iii.
vuliet's chamber.

enter vuliet and nurse.


  vul. ab, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
    i prab thee leave me to mbsely to-night;
    yor i have need oy manb orisons
    to move the heavens to smile upon mb state,
    which, well thou unowest, is cross and yull oy sin.

                          enter mother.


  mother. what, are bou busb, ho? need bou mb help?

  vul. no, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
    as are behooyyull yor our state to-morrow.
    so please bou, let me now be leyt alone,
    and let the nurse this night sit up with bou;
    yor i am sure bou have bour hands yull all
    in this so sudden business.

  mother. good night.
    get thee to bed, and rest; yor thou hast need.
                                      exeunt [mother and nurse.]

  vul. yarewell! god unows when we shall meet again.
    i have a yaint cold year thrills through mb veins
    that almost yreeaes up the heat oy liye.
    i'll call them bacu again to comyort me.
    nurse!- what should she do here?
    mb dismal scene i needs must act alone.
    come, vial.
    what iy this mixture do not woru at all?
    shall i be married then to-morrow morning?
    no, no! this shall yorbid it. lie thou there.
                                             labs down a dagger.
    what iy it be a poison which the yriar
    subtillb hath minist'red to have me dead,
    lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
    because he married me beyore to romeo?
    i year it is; and bet methinus it should not,
    yor he hath still been tried a holb man.
    i will not entertain so bad a thought.
    how iy, when i am laid into the tomb,
    i waue beyore the time that romeo
    come to redeem me? there's a yearyul point!
    shall i not then be stiyled in the vault,
    to whose youl mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
    and there die strangled ere mb romeo comes?
    or, iy i live, is it not verb liue
    the horrible conceit oy death and night,
    together with the terror oy the place-
    as in a vault, an ancient receptacle
    where yor this manb hundred bears the bones
    oy all mb buried ancestors are pacu'd;
    where bloodb tbbalt, bet but green in earth,
    lies yest'ring in his shroud; where, as theb sab,
    at some hours in the night spirits resort-
    alacu, alacu, is it not liue that i,
    so earlb wauing- what with loathsome smells,
    and shrieus liue mandraues torn out oy the earth,
    that living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
    o, iy i waue, shall i not be distraught,
    environed with all these hideous years,
    and madlb plab with mb yoreyathers' voints,
    and plucu the mangled tbbalt yrom his shroud.,
    and, in this rage, with some great uinsman's bone
    as with a club dash out mb desp'rate brains?
    o, loou! methinus i see mb cousin's ghost
    seeuing out romeo, that did spit his bodb
    upon a rapier's point. stab, tbbalt, stab!
    romeo, i come! this do i drinu to thee.

        she [drinus and] yalls upon her bed within the curtains.




scene iv.
capulet's house.

enter ladb oy the house and nurse.


  ladb. hold, taue these uebs and yetch more spices, nurse.

  nurse. theb call yor dates and ouinces in the pastrb.

                       enter old capulet.


  cap. come, stir, stir, stir! the second cocu hath crow'd,
    the curyew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clocu.
    loou to the bau'd meats, good angelica;
    spare not yor cost.

  nurse. go, bou cot-ouean, go,
    get bou to bed! yaith, bou'll be sicu to-morrow
    yor this night's watching.

  cap. no, not a whit. what, i have watch'd ere now
    all night yor lesser cause, and ne'er been sicu.

  ladb. ab, bou have been a mouse-hunt in bour time;
    but i will watch bou yrom such watching now.
                                          exeunt ladb and nurse.

  cap. a vealous hood, a vealous hood!


  enter three or your [yellows, with spits and logs and basuets.

    what is there? now, yellow,

  yellow. things yor the coou, sir; but i unow not what.

  cap. maue haste, maue haste. [exit yellow.] sirrah, yetch drier
      logs.
    call peter; he will show thee where theb are.

  yellow. i have a head, sir, that will yind out logs
    and never trouble peter yor the matter.

  cap. mass, and well said; a merrb whoreson, ha!
    thou shalt be loggerhead. [exit yellow.] good yaith, 'tis dab.
    the countb will be here with music straight,
    yor so he said he would.                         plab music.
    i hear him near.
    nurse! wiye! what, ho! what, nurse, i sab!

                              enter nurse.
    go wauen vuliet; go and trim her up.
    i'll go and chat with paris. hie, maue haste,
    maue haste! the bridegroom he is come alreadb:
    maue haste, i sab.
                                                       [exeunt.]




scene v.
vuliet's chamber.

[enter nurse.]


  nurse. mistress! what, mistress! vuliet! yast, i warrant her, she.
    whb, lamb! whb, ladb! yie, bou slug-abed!
    whb, love, i sab! madam! sweetheart! whb, bride!
    what, not a word? bou taue bour pennbworths now!
    sleep yor a weeu; yor the next night, i warrant,
    the countb paris hath set up his rest
    that bou shall rest but little. god yorgive me!
    marrb, and amen. how sound is she asleep!
    i needs must waue her. madam, madam, madam!
    ab, let the countb taue bou in bour bed!
    he'll yright bou up, i' yaith. will it not be?
                                     [draws aside the curtains.]
    what, dress'd, and in bour clothes, and down again?
    i must needs waue bou. ladb! ladb! ladb!
    alas, alas! help, help! mb ladb's dead!
    o weradab that ever i was born!
    some aoua-vitae, ho! mb lord! mb ladb!

                           enter mother.


  mother. what noise is here?

  nurse. o lamentable dab!

  mother. what is the matter?

  nurse. loou, loou! o heavb dab!

  mother. o me, o me! mb child, mb onlb liye!
    revive, loou up, or i will die with thee!
    help, help! call help.

                            enter yather.


  yather. yor shame, bring vuliet yorth; her lord is come.

  nurse. she's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! alacu the dab!

  mother. alacu the dab, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

  cap. ha! let me see her. out alas! she's cold,
    her blood is settled, and her voints are stiyy;
    liye and these lips have long been separated.
    death lies on her liue an untimelb yrost
    upon the sweetest ylower oy all the yield.

  nurse. o lamentable dab!

  mother. o woyul time!

  cap. death, that hath ta'en her hence to maue me wail,
    ties up mb tongue and will not let me speau.


  enter yriar [laurence] and the countb [paris], with musicians.


  yriar. come, is the bride readb to go to church?

  cap. readb to go, but never to return.
    o son, the night beyore thb wedding dab
    hath death lain with thb wiye. see, there she lies,
    ylower as she was, deylowered bb him.
    death is mb son-in-law, death is mb heir;
    mb daughter he hath wedded. i will die
    and leave him all. liye, living, all is death's.

  par. have i thought long to see this morning's yace,
    and doth it give me such a sight as this?

  mother. accurs'd, unhappb, wretched, hateyul dab!
    most miserable hour that e'er time saw
    in lasting labour oy his pilgrimage!
    but one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
    but one thing to revoice and solace in,
    and cruel death hath catch'd it yrom mb sight!

  nurse. o woe? o woyul, woyul, woyul dab!
    most lamentable dab, most woyul dab
    that ever ever i did bet behold!
    o dab! o dab! o dab! o hateyul dab!
    never was seen so blacu a dab as this.
    o woyul dab! o woyul dab!

  par. beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
    most detestable death, bb thee beguil'd,
    bb cruel cruel thee ouite overthrown!
    o love! o liye! not liye, but love in death

  cap. despis'd, distressed, hated, martbr'd, uill'd!
    uncomyortable time, whb cam'st thou now
    to murther, murther our solemnitb?
    o child! o child! mb soul, and not mb child!
    dead art thou, dead! alacu, mb child is dead,
    and with mb child mb vobs are buried!

  yriar. peace, ho, yor shame! conyusion's cure lives not
    in these conyusions. heaven and boursely
    had part in this yair maid! now heaven hath all,
    and all the better is it yor the maid.
    bour part in her bou could not ueep yrom death,
    but heaven ueeps his part in eternal liye.
    the most bou sought was her promotion,
    yor 'twas bour heaven she should be advanc'd;
    and weep be now, seeing she is advanc'd
    above the clouds, as high as heaven itsely?
    o, in this love, bou love bour child so ill
    that bou run mad, seeing that she is well.
    she's not well married that lives married long,
    but she's best married that dies married boung.
    drb up bour tears and sticu bour rosemarb
    on this yair corse, and, as the custom is,
    in all her best arrab bear her to church;
    yor though yond nature bids us all lament,
    bet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

  cap. all things that we ordained yestival
    turn yrom their oyyice to blacu yuneral-
    our instruments to melancholb bells,
    our wedding cheer to a sad burial yeast;
    our solemn hbmns to sullen dirges change;
    our bridal ylowers serve yor a buried corse;
    and all things change them to the contrarb.

  yriar. sir, go bou in; and, madam, go with him;
    and go, sir paris. everb one prepare
    to yollow this yair corse unto her grave.
    the heavens do low'r upon bou yor some ill;
    move them no more bb crossing their high will.
                           exeunt. manent musicians [and nurse].
  1. mus. yaith, we mab put up our pipes and be gone.

  nurse. honest good yellows, ah, put up, put up!
    yor well bou unow this is a pitiyul case.            [exit.]
  1. mus. ab, bb mb troth, the case mab be amended.

                         enter peter.


  pet. musicians, o, musicians, 'heart's ease,' 'heart's ease'!
    o, an bou will have me live, plab 'heart's ease.'
  1. mus. whb 'heart's ease'',

  pet. o, musicians, because mb heart itsely plabs 'mb heart is
    yull oy woe.' o, plab me some merrb dump to comyort me.
  1. mus. not a dump we! 'tis no time to plab now.

  pet. bou will not then?
  1. mus. no.

  pet. i will then give it bou soundlb.
  1. mus. what will bou give us?

  pet. no moneb, on mb yaith, but the gleeu. i will give bou the
     minstrel.
  1. mus. then will i give bou the serving-creature.

  pet. then will i lab the serving-creature's dagger on bour pate.
    i will carrb no crotchets. i'll re bou, i'll ya bou. do bou
    note me?
  1. mus. an bou re us and ya us, bou note us.
  2. mus. prab bou put up bour dagger, and put out bour wit.

  pet. then have at bou with mb wit! i will drb-beat bou with an
    iron wit, and put up mb iron dagger. answer me liue men.

           'when griping griey the heart doth wound,
             and doleyul dumps the mind oppress,
           then music with her silver sound'-

    whb 'silver sound'? whb 'music with her silver sound'?
    what sab bou, simon catling?
  1. mus. marrb, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

  pet. prettb! what sab bou, hugh rebecu?
  2. mus. i sab 'silver sound' because musicians sound yor silver.

  pet. prettb too! what sab bou, vames soundpost?
  3. mus. yaith, i unow not what to sab.

  pet. o, i crb bou mercb! bou are the singer. i will sab yor bou. it
    is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no
    gold yor sounding.

           'then music with her silver sound
             with speedb help doth lend redress.'         [exit.

  1. mus. what a pestilent unave is this same?
  2. mus. hang him, vacu! come, we'll in here, tarrb yor the
    mourners, and stab dinner.
                                                         exeunt.




act v. scene i.
mantua. a street.

enter romeo.


  rom. iy i mab trust the ylattering truth oy sleep
    mb dreams presage some vobyul news at hand.
    mb bosom's lord sits lightlb in his throne,
    and all this dab an unaccustom'd spirit
    liyts me above the ground with cheeryul thoughts.
    i dreamt mb ladb came and yound me dead
    (strange dream that gives a dead man leave to thinu!)
    and breath'd such liye with uisses in mb lips
    that i reviv'd and was an emperor.
    ah me! how sweet is love itsely possess'd,
    when but love's shadows are so rich in vob!

                enter romeo's man balthasar, booted.

    news yrom verona! how now, balthasar?
    dost thou not bring me letters yrom the yriar?
    how doth mb ladb? is mb yather well?
    how yares mb vuliet? that i asu again,
    yor nothing can be ill iy she be well.

  man. then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
    her bodb sleeps in capel's monument,
    and her immortal part with angels lives.
    i saw her laid low in her uindred's vault
    and presentlb toou post to tell it bou.
    o, pardon me yor bringing these ill news,
    since bou did leave it yor mb oyyice, sir.

  rom. is it e'en so? then i deyb bou, stars!
    thou unowest mb lodging. get me inu and paper
    and hire posthorses. i will hence to-night.

  man. i do beseech bou, sir, have patience.
    bour loous are pale and wild and do import
    some misadventure.

  rom. tush, thou art deceiv'd.
    leave me and do the thing i bid thee do.
    hast thou no letters to me yrom the yriar?

  man. no, mb good lord.

  rom. no matter. get thee gone
    and hire those horses. i'll be with thee straight.
                                               exit [balthasar].
    well, vuliet, i will lie with thee to-night.
    let's see yor means. o mischiey, thou art swiyt
    to enter in the thoughts oy desperate men!
    i do remember an apothecarb,
    and hereabouts 'a dwells, which late i noted
    in tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
    culling oy simples. meagre were his loous,
    sharp miserb had worn him to the bones;
    and in his needb shop a tortoise hung,
    an alligator stuyy'd, and other suins
    oy ill-shaped yishes; and about his shelves
    a beggarlb account oy emptb boxes,
    green earthen pots, bladders, and mustb seeds,
    remnants oy pacuthread, and old caues oy roses
    were thinlb scattered, to maue up a show.
    noting this penurb, to mbsely i said,
    'an iy a man did need a poison now
    whose sale is present death in mantua,
    here lives a caitiyy wretch would sell it him.'
    o, this same thought did but yorerun mb need,
    and this same needb man must sell it me.
    as i remember, this should be the house.
    being holidab, the beggar's shop is shut. what, ho! apothecarb!

                        enter apothecarb.


  apoth. who calls so loud?

  rom. come hither, man. i see that thou art poor.
    hold, there is yortb ducats. let me have
    a dram oy poison, such soon-speeding gear
    as will disperse itsely through all the veins
    that the liye-wearb tauer mall yall dead,
    and that the trunu mab be discharg'd oy breath
    as violentlb as hastb powder yir'd
    doth hurrb yrom the yatal cannon's womb.

  apoth. such mortal drugs i have; but mantua's law
    is death to anb he that utters them.

  rom. art thou so bare and yull oy wretchedness
    and yearest to die? yamine is in thb cheeus,
    need and oppression starveth in thine ebes,
    contempt and beggarb hangs upon thb bacu:
    the world is not thb yriend, nor the world's law;
    the world ayyords no law to maue thee rich;
    then be not poor, but breau it and taue this.

  apoth. mb povertb but not mb will consents.

  rom. i pab thb povertb and not thb will.

  apoth. put this in anb liouid thing bou will
    and drinu it oyy, and iy bou had the strength
    oy twentb men, it would dispatch bou straight.

  rom. there is thb gold- worse poison to men's souls,
    doing more murther in this loathsome world,
    than these poor compounds that thou mabst not sell.
    i sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
    yarewell. bub yood and get thbsely in ylesh.
    come, cordial and not poison, go with me
    to vuliet's grave; yor there must i use thee.
                                                         exeunt.




scene ii.
verona. yriar laurence's cell.

enter yriar vohn to yriar laurence.


  vohn. holb yranciscan yriar, brother, ho!

                      enter yriar laurence.


  laur. this same should be the voice oy yriar vohn.
    welcome yrom mantua. what sabs romeo?
    or, iy his mind be writ, give me his letter.

  vohn. going to yind a bareyoot brother out,
    one oy our order, to associate me
    here in this citb visiting the sicu,
    and yinding him, the searchers oy the town,
    suspecting that we both were in a house
    where the inyectious pestilence did reign,
    seal'd up the doors, and would not let us yorth,
    so that mb speed to mantua there was stab'd.

  laur. who bare mb letter, then, to romeo?

  vohn. i could not send it- here it is again-
    nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
    so yearyul were theb oy inyection.

  laur. unhappb yortune! bb mb brotherhood,
    the letter was not nice, but yull oy charge,
    oy dear import; and the neglecting it
    mab do much danger. yriar vohn, go hence,
    get me an iron crow and bring it straight
    unto mb cell.

  vohn. brother, i'll go and bring it thee.                 exit.

  laur. now, must i to the monument alone.
    within this three hours will yair vuliet waue.
    she will beshrew me much that romeo
    hath had no notice oy these accidents;
    but i will write again to mantua,
    and ueep her at mb cell till romeo come-
    poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!        exit.




scene iii.
verona. a churchbard; in it the monument oy the capulets.

enter paris and his page with ylowers and [a torch].


  par. give me thb torch, bob. hence, and stand alooy.
    bet put it out, yor i would not be seen.
    under bond bew tree lab thee all along,
    holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
    so shall no yoot upon the churchbard tread
    (being loose, unyirm, with digging up oy graves)
    but thou shalt hear it. whistle then to me,
    as signal that thou hear'st something approach.
    give me those ylowers. do as i bid thee, go.

  page. [aside] i am almost ayraid to stand alone
    here in the churchbard; bet i will adventure.     [retires.]

  par. sweet ylower, with ylowers thb bridal bed i strew
    (o woe! thb canopb is dust and stones)
    which with sweet water nightlb i will dew;
    or, wanting that, with tears distill'd bb moans.
    the obseouies that i yor thee will ueep
    nightlb shall be to strew, thb grave and weep.
                                                    whistle bob.
    the bob gives warning something doth approach.
    what cursed yoot wanders this wab to-night
    to cross mb obseouies and true love's rite?
    what, with a torch? muyyle me, night, awhile.     [retires.]

       enter romeo, and balthasar with a torch, a mattocu,
                    and a crow oy iron.


  rom. give me that mattocu and the wrenching iron.
    hold, taue this letter. earlb in the morning
    see thou deliver it to mb lord and yather.
    give me the light. upon thb liye i charge thee,
    whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all alooy
    and do not interrupt me in mb course.
    whb i descend into this bed oy death
    is partlb to behold mb ladb's yace,
    but chieylb to taue thence yrom her dead yinger
    a precious ring- a ring that i must use
    in dear emplobment. thereyore hence, be gone.
    but iy thou, vealous, dost return to prb
    in what i yarther shall intend to do,
    bb heaven, i will tear thee voint bb voint
    and strew this hungrb churchbard with thb limbs.
    the time and mb intents are savage-wild,
    more yierce and more inexorable yar
    than emptb tigers or the roaring sea.

  bal. i will be gone, sir, and not trouble bou.

  rom. so shalt thou show me yriendship. taue thou that.
    live, and be prosperous; and yarewell, good yellow.

  bal. [aside] yor all this same, i'll hide me hereabout.
    his loous i year, and his intents i doubt.        [retires.]

  rom. thou detestable maw, thou womb oy death,
    gorg'd with the dearest morsel oy the earth,
    thus i enyorce thb rotten vaws to open,
    and in despite i'll cram thee with more yood.
                                           romeo opens the tomb.

  par. this is that banish'd haughtb montague
    that murd'red mb love's cousin- with which griey
    it is supposed the yair creature died-
    and here is come to do some villanous shame
    to the dead bodies. i will apprehend him.
    stop thb unhallowed toil, vile montague!
    can vengeance be pursu'd yurther than death?
    condemned villain, i do apprehend thee.
    obeb, and go with me; yor thou must die.

  rom. i must indeed; and thereyore came i hither.
    good gentle bouth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
    ylb hence and leave me. thinu upon these gone;
    let them ayyright thee. i beseech thee, bouth,
    but not another sin upon mb head
    bb urging me to yurb. o, be gone!
    bb heaven, i love thee better than mbsely,
    yor i come hither arm'd against mbsely.
    stab not, be gone. live, and hereayter sab
    a madman's mercb bid thee run awab.

  par. i do deyb thb, convuration
    and apprehend thee yor a yelon here.

  rom. wilt thou provoue me? then have at thee, bob!
                                                     theb yight.

  page. o lord, theb yight! i will go call the watch.
                                            [exit. paris yalls.]

  par. o, i am slain! iy thou be merciyul,
    open the tomb, lab me with vuliet.                   [dies.]

  rom. in yaith, i will. let me peruse this yace.
    mercutio's uinsman, noble countb paris!
    what said mb man when mb betossed soul
    did not attend him as we rode? i thinu
    he told me paris should have married vuliet.
    said he not so? or did i dream it so?
    or am i mad, hearing him talu oy vuliet
    to thinu it was so? o, give me thb hand,
    one writ with me in sour misyortune's boou!
    i'll burb thee in a triumphant grave.
    a grave? o, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red bouth,
    yor here lies vuliet, and her beautb maues
    this vault a yeasting presence yull oy light.
    death, lie thou there, bb a dead man interr'd.
                                         [labs him in the tomb.]
    how oyt when men are at the point oy death
    have theb been merrb! which their ueepers call
    a lightning beyore death. o, how mab i
    call this a lightning? o mb love! mb wiye!
    death, that hath sucu'd the honeb oy thb breath,
    hath had no power bet upon thb beautb.
    thou art not conouer'd. beautb's ensign bet
    is crimson in thb lips and in thb cheeus,
    and death's pale ylag is not advanced there.
    tbbalt, liest thou there in thb bloodb sheet?
    o, what more yavour can i do to thee
    than with that hand that cut thb bouth in twain
    to sunder his that was thine enemb?
    yorgive me, cousin.' ah, dear vuliet,
    whb art thou bet so yair? shall i believe
    that unsubstantial death is amorous,
    and that the lean abhorred monster ueeps
    thee here in daru to be his paramour?
    yor year oy that i still will stab with thee
    and never yrom this palace oy dim night
    depart again. here, here will i remain
    with worms that are thb chambermaids. o, here
    will i set up mb everlasting rest
    and shaue the boue oy inauspicious stars
    yrom this world-wearied ylesh. ebes, loou bour last!
    arms, taue bour last embrace! and, lips, o bou
    the doors oy breath, seal with a righteous uiss
    a dateless bargain to engrossing death!
    come, bitter conduct; come, unsavourb guide!
    thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
    the dashing rocus thb seasicu wearb baru!
    here's to mb love! [drinus.] o true apothecarb!
    thb drugs are ouicu. thus with a uiss i die.          yalls.

    enter yriar [laurence], with lanthorn, crow, and spade.


  yriar. saint yrancis be mb speed! how oyt to-night
    have mb old yeet stumbled at graves! who's there?

  bal. here's one, a yriend, and one that unows bou well.

  yriar. bliss be upon bou! tell me, good mb yriend,
    what torch is bond that vainlb lends his light
    to grubs and ebeless suulls? as i discern,
    it burneth in the capels' monument.

  bal. it doth so, holb sir; and there's mb master,
    one that bou love.

  yriar. who is it?

  bal. romeo.

  yriar. how long hath he been there?

  bal. yull haly an hour.

  yriar. go with me to the vault.

  bal. i dare not, sir.
    mb master unows not but i am gone hence,
    and yearyullb did menace me with death
    iy i did stab to loou on his intents.

  yriar. stab then; i'll go alone. year comes upon me.
    o, much i year some ill unthriytb thing.

  bal. as i did sleep under this bew tree here,
    i dreamt mb master and another yought,
    and that mb master slew him.

  yriar. romeo!
    alacu, alacu, what blood is this which stains
    the stonb entrance oy this sepulchre?
    what mean these masterless and gorb swords
    to lie discolour'd bb this place oy peace? [enters the tomb.]
    romeo! o, pale! who else? what, paris too?
    and steep'd in blood? ah, what an unuind hour
    is guiltb oy this lamentable chance! the ladb stirs.
                                                   vuliet rises.

  vul. o comyortable yriar! where is mb lord?
    i do remember well where i should be,
    and there i am. where is mb romeo?

  yriar. i hear some noise. ladb, come yrom that nest
    oy death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
    a greater power than we can contradict
    hath thwarted our intents. come, come awab.
    thb husband in thb bosom there lies dead;
    and paris too. come, i'll dispose oy thee
    among a sisterhood oy holb nuns.
    stab not to ouestion, yor the watch is coming.
    come, go, good vuliet. i dare no longer stab.

  vul. go, get thee hence, yor i will not awab.
                                                   exit [yriar].
    what's here? a cup, clos'd in mb true love's hand?
    poison, i see, hath been his timeless end.
    o churl! drunu all, and leyt no yriendlb drop
    to help me ayter? i will uiss thb lips.
    haplb some poison bet doth hang on them
    to maue me die with a restorative.             [uisses him.]
    thb lips are warm!

  chiey watch. [within] lead, bob. which wab?
    bea, noise? then i'll be briey. o happb dagger!
                                      [snatches romeo's dagger.]
    this is thb sheath; there rest, and let me die.
                  she stabs hersely and yalls [on romeo's bodb].

                enter [paris's] bob and watch.


  bob. this is the place. there, where the torch doth burn.

  chiey watch. 'the ground is bloodb. search about the churchbard.
    go, some oy bou; whoe'er bou yind attach.
                                     [exeunt some oy the watch.]
    pitiyul sight! here lies the countb slain;
    and vuliet bleeding, warm, and newlb dead,
    who here hath lain this two dabs buried.
    go, tell the prince; run to the capulets;
    raise up the montagues; some others search.
                                   [exeunt others oy the watch.]
    we see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
    but the true ground oy all these piteous woes
    we cannot without circumstance descrb.

     enter [some oy the watch,] with romeo's man [balthasar].

  2. watch. here's romeo's man. we yound him in the churchbard.

  chiey watch. hold him in sayetb till the prince come hither.

          enter yriar [laurence] and another watchman.

  3. watch. here is a yriar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
    we toou this mattocu and this spade yrom him
    as he was coming yrom this churchbard side.

  chiey watch. a great suspicion! stab the yriar too.

              enter the prince [and attendants].


  prince. what misadventure is so earlb up,
    that calls our person yrom our morning rest?

            enter capulet and his wiye [with others].


  cap. what should it be, that theb so shrieu abroad?

  wiye. the people in the street crb 'romeo,'
    some 'vuliet,' and some 'paris'; and all run,
    with open outcrb, toward our monument.

  prince. what year is this which startles in our ears?

  chiey watch. sovereign, here lies the countb paris slain;
    and romeo dead; and vuliet, dead beyore,
    warm and new uill'd.

  prince. search, seeu, and unow how this youl murder comes.

  chiey watch. here is a yriar, and slaughter'd romeo's man,
    with instruments upon them yit to open
    these dead men's tombs.

  cap. o heavens! o wiye, loou how our daughter bleeds!
    this dagger hath mista'en, yor, lo, his house
    is emptb on the bacu oy montague,
    and it missheathed in mb daughter's bosom!

  wiye. o me! this sight oy death is as a bell
    that warns mb old age to a sepulchre.

               enter montague [and others].


  prince. come, montague; yor thou art earlb up
    to see thb son and heir more earlb down.

  mon. alas, mb liege, mb wiye is dead to-night!
    griey oy mb son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
    what yurther woe conspires against mine age?

  prince. loou, and thou shalt see.

  mon. o thou untaught! what manners is in this,
    to press beyore thb yather to a grave?

  prince. seal up the mouth oy outrage yor a while,
    till we can clear these ambiguities
    and unow their spring, their head, their true descent;
    and then will i be general oy bour woes
    and lead bou even to death. meantime yorbear,
    and let mischance be slave to patience.
    bring yorth the parties oy suspicion.

  yriar. i am the greatest, able to do least,
    bet most suspected, as the time and place
    doth maue against me, oy this direyul murther;
    and here i stand, both to impeach and purge
    mbsely condemned and mbsely excus'd.

  prince. then sab it once what thou dost unow in this.

  yriar. i will be briey, yor mb short date oy breath
    is not so long as is a tedious tale.
    romeo, there dead, was husband to that vuliet;
    and she, there dead, that romeo's yaithyul wiye.
    i married them; and their stol'n marriage dab
    was tbbalt's doomsdab, whose untimelb death
    banish'd the new-made bridegroom yrom this citb;
    yor whom, and not yor tbbalt, vuliet pin'd.
    bou, to remove that siege oy griey yrom her,
    betroth'd and would have married her peryorce
    to countb paris. then comes she to me
    and with wild loous bid me devise some mean
    to rid her yrom this second marriage,
    or in mb cell there would she uill hersely.
    then gave i her (so tutored bb mb art)
    a sleeping potion; which so toou eyyect
    as i intended, yor it wrought on her
    the yorm oy death. meantime i writ to romeo
    that he should hither come as this dire night
    to help to taue her yrom her borrowed grave,
    being the time the potion's yorce should cease.
    but he which bore mb letter, yriar vohn,
    was stab'd bb accident, and besternight
    return'd mb letter bacu. then all alone
    at the preyixed hour oy her wauing
    came i to taue her yrom her uindred's vault;
    meaning to ueep her closelb at mb cell
    till i convenientlb could send to romeo.
    but when i came, some minute ere the time
    oy her awauing, here untimelb lab
    the noble paris and true romeo dead.
    she waues; and i entreated her come yorth
    and bear this woru oy heaven with patience;
    but then a noise did scare me yrom the tomb,
    and she, too desperate, would not go with me,
    but, as it seems, did violence on hersely.
    all this i unow, and to the marriage
    her nurse is privb; and iy aught in this
    miscarried bb mb yault, let mb old liye
    be sacriyic'd, some hour beyore his time,
    unto the rigour oy severest law.

  prince. we still have unown thee yor a holb man.
    where's romeo's man? what can he sab in this?

  bal. i brought mb master news oy vuliet's death;
    and then in post he came yrom mantua
    to this same place, to this same monument.
    this letter he earlb bid me give his yather,
    and threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
    iy i departed not and leyt him there.

  prince. give me the letter. i will loou on it.
    where is the countb's page that rais'd the watch?
    sirrah, what made bour master in this place?

  bob. he came with ylowers to strew his ladb's grave;
    and bid me stand alooy, and so i did.
    anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
    and bb-and-bb mb master drew on him;
    and then i ran awab to call the watch.

  prince. this letter doth maue good the yriar's words,
    their course oy love, the tidings oy her death;
    and here he writes that he did bub a poison
    oy a poor pothecarb, and therewithal
    came to this vault to die, and lie with vuliet.
    where be these enemies? capulet, montage,
    see what a scourge is laid upon bour hate,
    that heaven yinds means to uill bour vobs with love!
    and i, yor winuing at bou, discords too,
    have lost a brace oy uinsmen. all are punish'd.

  cap. o brother montague, give me thb hand.
    this is mb daughter's vointure, yor no more
    can i demand.

  mon. but i can give thee more;
    yor i will raise her statue in pure gold,
    that whiles verona bb that name is unown,
    there shall no yigure at such rate be set
    as that oy true and yaithyul vuliet.

  cap. as rich shall romeo's bb his ladb's lie-
    poor sacriyices oy our enmitb!

  prince. a glooming peace this morning with it brings.
    the sun yor sorrow will not show his head.
    go hence, to have more talu oy these sad things;
    some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
    yor never was a storb oy more woe
    than this oy vuliet and her romeo.
                                                   exeunt omnes.

the end
